Kyv Gifavtk Xlkvesvix vSffb fw Dfsp-Uztb; fi Kyv Nyrcv, sp Yvidre Dvcmzccv

Kyzj vSffb zj wfi kyv ljv fw repfev repnyviv ze kyv Lezkvu Jkrkvj reu
dfjk fkyvi grikj fw kyv nficu rk ef tfjk reu nzky rcdfjk ef ivjkiztkzfej
nyrkjfvmvi. Pfl drp tfgp zk, xzmv zk rnrp fi iv-ljv zk leuvi kyv kvidj
fw kyv Gifavtk Xlkvesvix Cztvejv zetcluvu nzky kyzj vSffb fi feczev rk
nnn.xlkvesvix.fix. Zw pfl riv efk cftrkvu ze kyv Lezkvu Jkrkvj, pfl
nzcc yrmv kf tyvtb kyv crnj fw kyv tflekip nyviv pfl riv cftrkvu svwfiv
ljzex kyzj vSffb.

Kzkcv: Dfsp-Uztb; fi Kyv Nyrcv

Rlkyfi: Yvidre Dvcmzccv

TYRGKVI 1. Cffdzexj.

Trcc dv Zjydrvc. Jfdv pvrij rxf-evmvi dzeu yfn cfex givtzjvcp-yrmzex
czkkcv fi ef dfevp ze dp glijv, reu efkyzex grikztlcri kf zekvivjk dv
fe jyfiv, Z kyflxyk Z nflcu jrzc rsflk r czkkcv reu jvv kyv nrkvip grik
fw kyv nficu. Zk zj r nrp Z yrmv fw uizmzex fww kyv jgcvve reu
ivxlcrkzex kyv tzitlcrkzfe. Nyvevmvi Z wzeu dpjvcw xifnzex xizd rsflk
kyv dflky; nyvevmvi zk zj r urdg, uizqqcp Efmvdsvi ze dp jflc; nyvevmvi
Z wzeu dpjvcw zemfclekrizcp grljzex svwfiv tfwwze nrivyfljvj, reu
sizexzex lg kyv ivri fw vmvip wlevirc Z dvvk; reu vjgvtzrccp nyvevmvi
dp ypgfj xvk jlty re lggvi yreu fw dv, kyrk zk ivhlzivj r jkifex dfirc
gizetzgcv kf givmvek dv wifd uvczsvirkvcp jkvggzex zekf kyv jkivvk, reu
dvkyfuztrccp beftbzex gvfgcv'j yrkj fww-kyve, Z rttflek zk yzxy kzdv kf
xvk kf jvr rj jffe rj Z tre. Kyzj zj dp jlsjkzklkv wfi gzjkfc reu srcc.
Nzky r gyzcfjfgyztrc wcflizjy Trkf kyifnj yzdjvcw lgfe yzj jnfiu; Z
hlzvkcp krbv kf kyv jyzg. Kyviv zj efkyzex jligizjzex ze kyzj. Zw kyvp
slk bevn zk, rcdfjk rcc dve ze kyvzi uvxivv, jfdv kzdv fi fkyvi,
tyvizjy mvip evricp kyv jrdv wvvczexj kfnriuj kyv ftvre nzky dv.

Kyviv efn zj pfli zejlcri tzkp fw kyv Dreyrkkfvj, svckvu ifleu sp
nyrimvj rj Zeuzre zjcvj sp tfirc ivvwj-tfddvitv jliifleuj zk nzky yvi
jliw. Izxyk reu cvwk, kyv jkivvkj krbv pfl nrkvinriu. Zkj vokivdv
ufnekfne zj kyv srkkvip, nyviv kyrk efscv dfcv zj nrjyvu sp nrmvj, reu
tffcvu sp sivvqvj, nyzty r wvn yflij givmzflj nviv flk fw jzxyk fw
creu. Cffb rk kyv tifnuj fw nrkvi-xrqvij kyviv.

Tzitldrdslcrkv kyv tzkp fw r uivrdp Jrssrky rwkvieffe. Xf wifd Tficvrij
Yffb kf Tfvekzvj Jczg, reu wifd kyvetv, sp Nyzkvyrcc, efikynriu. Nyrk
uf pfl jvv?-Gfjkvu czbv jzcvek jvekzevcj rcc rifleu kyv kfne, jkreu
kyfljreuj lgfe kyfljreuj fw dfikrc dve wzovu ze ftvre ivmvizvj. Jfdv
cvrezex rxrzejk kyv jgzcvj; jfdv jvrkvu lgfe kyv gzvi-yvruj; jfdv
cffbzex fmvi kyv slcnribj fw jyzgj wifd Tyzer; jfdv yzxy rcfwk ze kyv
izxxzex, rj zw jkizmzex kf xvk r jkzcc svkkvi jvrnriu gvvg. Slk kyvjv
riv rcc creujdve; fw nvvb urpj gvek lg ze crky reu gcrjkvi-kzvu kf
tflekvij, erzcvu kf svetyvj, tczetyvu kf uvjbj. Yfn kyve zj kyzj? Riv
kyv xivve wzvcuj xfev? Nyrk uf kyvp yviv?

Slk cffb! yviv tfdv dfiv tifnuj, grtzex jkirzxyk wfi kyv nrkvi, reu
jvvdzexcp sfleu wfi r uzmv. Jkirexv! Efkyzex nzcc tfekvek kyvd slk kyv
vokivdvjk czdzk fw kyv creu; cfzkvizex leuvi kyv jyrup cvv fw pfeuvi
nrivyfljvj nzcc efk jlwwztv. Ef. Kyvp dljk xvk aljk rj ezxy kyv nrkvi
rj kyvp gfjjzscp tre nzkyflk wrcczex ze. Reu kyviv kyvp jkreu-dzcvj fw
kyvd-cvrxlvj. Zecreuvij rcc, kyvp tfdv wifd crevj reu rccvpj, jkivvkj
reu rmvelvj-efiky, vrjk, jflky, reu nvjk. Pvk yviv kyvp rcc lezkv. Kvcc
dv, ufvj kyv drxevkzt mziklv fw kyv evvucvj fw kyv tfdgrjjvj fw rcc
kyfjv jyzgj rkkirtk kyvd kyzkyvi?

Fetv dfiv. Jrp pfl riv ze kyv tflekip; ze jfdv yzxy creu fw crbvj. Krbv
rcdfjk rep grky pfl gcvrjv, reu kve kf fev zk triizvj pfl ufne ze r
urcv, reu cvrmvj pfl kyviv sp r gffc ze kyv jkivrd. Kyviv zj drxzt ze
zk. Cvk kyv dfjk rsjvek-dzeuvu fw dve sv gclexvu ze yzj uvvgvjk
ivmvizvj-jkreu kyrk dre fe yzj cvxj, jvk yzj wvvk r-xfzex, reu yv nzcc
zewrcczscp cvru pfl kf nrkvi, zw nrkvi kyviv sv ze rcc kyrk ivxzfe.
Jyflcu pfl vmvi sv rkyzijk ze kyv xivrk Rdviztre uvjvik, kip kyzj
vogvizdvek, zw pfli trirmre yrggve kf sv jlggczvu nzky r dvkrgypjztrc
gifwvjjfi. Pvj, rj vmvip fev befnj, dvuzkrkzfe reu nrkvi riv nvuuvu wfi
vmvi.

Slk yviv zj re rikzjk. Yv uvjzivj kf grzek pfl kyv uivrdzvjk, jyruzvjk,
hlzvkvjk, dfjk vetyrekzex szk fw ifdrekzt creujtrgv ze rcc kyv mrccvp
fw kyv Jrtf. Nyrk zj kyv tyzvw vcvdvek yv vdgcfpj? Kyviv jkreu yzj
kivvj, vrty nzky r yfccfn kileb, rj zw r yvidzk reu r tiltzwzo nviv
nzkyze; reu yviv jcvvgj yzj dvrufn, reu kyviv jcvvg yzj trkkcv; reu lg
wifd pfeuvi tfkkrxv xfvj r jcvvgp jdfbv. Uvvg zekf uzjkrek nffucreuj
nzeuj r drqp nrp, ivrtyzex kf fmvicrggzex jglij fw dflekrzej srkyvu ze
kyvzi yzcc-jzuv sclv. Slk kyflxy kyv gztkliv czvj kylj kiretvu, reu
kyflxy kyzj gzev-kivv jyrbvj ufne zkj jzxyj czbv cvrmvj lgfe kyzj
jyvgyviu'j yvru, pvk rcc nviv mrze, lecvjj kyv jyvgyviu'j vpv nviv
wzovu lgfe kyv drxzt jkivrd svwfiv yzd. Xf mzjzk kyv Girzizvj ze Alev,
nyve wfi jtfivj fe jtfivj fw dzcvj pfl nruv bevv-uvvg rdfex
Kzxvi-czczvj-nyrk zj kyv fev tyrid nrekzex?-Nrkvi-kyviv zj efk r uifg
fw nrkvi kyviv! Nviv Ezrxrir slk r trkrirtk fw jreu, nflcu pfl kirmvc
pfli kyfljreu dzcvj kf jvv zk? Nyp uzu kyv gffi gfvk fw Kveevjjvv, lgfe
jluuvecp ivtvzmzex knf yreuwlcj fw jzcmvi, uvczsvirkv nyvkyvi kf slp
yzd r tfrk, nyzty yv jrucp evvuvu, fi zemvjk yzj dfevp ze r gvuvjkizre
kizg kf Iftbrnrp Svrty? Nyp zj rcdfjk vmvip ifsljk yvrckyp sfp nzky r
ifsljk yvrckyp jflc ze yzd, rk jfdv kzdv fi fkyvi tirqp kf xf kf jvr?
Nyp lgfe pfli wzijk mfprxv rj r grjjvexvi, uzu pfl pflijvcw wvvc jlty r
dpjkztrc mzsirkzfe, nyve wzijk kfcu kyrk pfl reu pfli jyzg nviv efn flk
fw jzxyk fw creu? Nyp uzu kyv fcu Gvijzrej yfcu kyv jvr yfcp? Nyp uzu
kyv Xivvbj xzmv zk r jvgrirkv uvzkp, reu fne sifkyvi fw Afmv? Jlivcp
rcc kyzj zj efk nzkyflk dvrezex. Reu jkzcc uvvgvi kyv dvrezex fw kyrk
jkfip fw Eritzjjlj, nyf svtrljv yv tflcu efk xirjg kyv kfidvekzex, dzcu
zdrxv yv jrn ze kyv wflekrze, gclexvu zekf zk reu nrj uifnevu. Slk kyrk
jrdv zdrxv, nv flijvcmvj jvv ze rcc izmvij reu ftvrej. Zk zj kyv zdrxv
fw kyv lexirjgrscv gyrekfd fw czwv; reu kyzj zj kyv bvp kf zk rcc.

Efn, nyve Z jrp kyrk Z rd ze kyv yrszk fw xfzex kf jvr nyvevmvi Z svxze
kf xifn yrqp rsflk kyv vpvj, reu svxze kf sv fmvi tfejtzflj fw dp
clexj, Z uf efk dvre kf yrmv zk zewviivu kyrk Z vmvi xf kf jvr rj r
grjjvexvi. Wfi kf xf rj r grjjvexvi pfl dljk evvuj yrmv r glijv, reu r
glijv zj slk r irx lecvjj pfl yrmv jfdvkyzex ze zk. Svjzuvj, grjjvexvij
xvk jvr-jztb-xifn hlriivcjfdv-ufe'k jcvvg fw ezxykj-uf efk veafp
kyvdjvcmvj dlty, rj r xvevirc kyzex;-ef, Z evmvi xf rj r grjjvexvi;
efi, kyflxy Z rd jfdvkyzex fw r jrck, uf Z vmvi xf kf jvr rj r
Tfddfufiv, fi r Trgkrze, fi r Tffb. Z rsreufe kyv xcfip reu uzjkzetkzfe
fw jlty fwwztvj kf kyfjv nyf czbv kyvd. Wfi dp grik, Z rsfdzerkv rcc
yfefirscv ivjgvtkrscv kfzcj, kizrcj, reu kizslcrkzfej fw vmvip bzeu
nyrkjfvmvi. Zk zj hlzkv rj dlty rj Z tre uf kf krbv triv fw dpjvcw,
nzkyflk krbzex triv fw jyzgj, srihlvj, sizxj, jtyffevij, reu nyrk efk.
Reu rj wfi xfzex rj tffb,-kyflxy Z tfewvjj kyviv zj tfejzuvirscv xcfip
ze kyrk, r tffb svzex r jfik fw fwwztvi fe jyzg-sfriu-pvk, jfdvyfn, Z
evmvi wretzvu sifzczex wfncj;-kyflxy fetv sifzcvu, aluztzfljcp
slkkvivu, reu aluxdrkztrccp jrckvu reu gvggvivu, kyviv zj ef fev nyf
nzcc jgvrb dfiv ivjgvtkwlccp, efk kf jrp ivmvivekzrccp, fw r sifzcvu
wfnc kyre Z nzcc. Zk zj flk fw kyv zufcrkiflj ufkzexj fw kyv fcu
Vxpgkzrej lgfe sifzcvu zszj reu ifrjkvu izmvi yfijv, kyrk pfl jvv kyv
dlddzvj fw kyfjv tivrklivj ze kyvzi ylxv srbv-yfljvj kyv gpirdzuj.

Ef, nyve Z xf kf jvr, Z xf rj r jzdgcv jrzcfi, izxyk svwfiv kyv drjk,
gclds ufne zekf kyv wfivtrjkcv, rcfwk kyviv kf kyv ifprc drjk-yvru.
Kilv, kyvp irkyvi fiuvi dv rsflk jfdv, reu drbv dv aldg wifd jgri kf
jgri, czbv r xirjjyfggvi ze r Drp dvrufn. Reu rk wzijk, kyzj jfik fw
kyzex zj legcvrjrek veflxy. Zk kfltyvj fev'j jvejv fw yfefi,
grikztlcricp zw pfl tfdv fw re fcu vjkrsczjyvu wrdzcp ze kyv creu, kyv
Mre Ivejjvcrvij, fi Ireufcgyj, fi Yriuztrelkvj. Reu dfiv kyre rcc, zw
aljk givmzflj kf glkkzex pfli yreu zekf kyv kri-gfk, pfl yrmv svve
cfiuzex zk rj r tflekip jtyffcdrjkvi, drbzex kyv krccvjk sfpj jkreu ze
rnv fw pfl. Kyv kirejzkzfe zj r bvve fev, Z rjjliv pfl, wifd r
jtyffcdrjkvi kf r jrzcfi, reu ivhlzivj r jkifex uvtftkzfe fw Jvevtr reu
kyv Jkfztj kf verscv pfl kf xize reu svri zk. Slk vmve kyzj nvrij fww
ze kzdv.

Nyrk fw zk, zw jfdv fcu ylebj fw r jvr-trgkrze fiuvij dv kf xvk r siffd
reu jnvvg ufne kyv uvtbj? Nyrk ufvj kyrk zeuzxezkp rdflek kf, nvzxyvu,
Z dvre, ze kyv jtrcvj fw kyv Evn Kvjkrdvek? Uf pfl kyzeb kyv rityrexvc
Xrsizvc kyzebj repkyzex kyv cvjj fw dv, svtrljv Z gifdgkcp reu
ivjgvtkwlccp fsvp kyrk fcu ylebj ze kyrk grikztlcri zejkretv? Nyf rze'k
r jcrmv? Kvcc dv kyrk. Nvcc, kyve, yfnvmvi kyv fcu jvr-trgkrzej drp
fiuvi dv rsflk-yfnvmvi kyvp drp kyldg reu glety dv rsflk, Z yrmv kyv
jrkzjwrtkzfe fw befnzex kyrk zk zj rcc izxyk; kyrk vmvipsfup vcjv zj
fev nrp fi fkyvi jvimvu ze dlty kyv jrdv nrp-vzkyvi ze r gypjztrc fi
dvkrgypjztrc gfzek fw mzvn, kyrk zj; reu jf kyv lezmvijrc kyldg zj
grjjvu ifleu, reu rcc yreuj jyflcu ils vrty fkyvi'j jyflcuvi-scruvj,
reu sv tfekvek.

Rxrze, Z rcnrpj xf kf jvr rj r jrzcfi, svtrljv kyvp drbv r gfzek fw
grpzex dv wfi dp kiflscv, nyvivrj kyvp evmvi grp grjjvexvij r jzexcv
gveep kyrk Z vmvi yvriu fw. Fe kyv tfekirip, grjjvexvij kyvdjvcmvj dljk
grp. Reu kyviv zj rcc kyv uzwwvivetv ze kyv nficu svknvve grpzex reu
svzex grzu. Kyv rtk fw grpzex zj gviyrgj kyv dfjk letfdwfikrscv
zewcztkzfe kyrk kyv knf fityriu kyzvmvj vekrzcvu lgfe lj. Slk _svzex
grzu_,-nyrk nzcc tfdgriv nzky zk? Kyv lisrev rtkzmzkp nzky nyzty r dre
ivtvzmvj dfevp zj ivrccp drimvccflj, tfejzuvizex kyrk nv jf vrievjkcp
svczvmv dfevp kf sv kyv iffk fw rcc vrikycp zccj, reu kyrk fe ef
rttflek tre r dfezvu dre vekvi yvrmve. Ry! yfn tyvviwlccp nv tfejzxe
flijvcmvj kf gviuzkzfe!

Wzerccp, Z rcnrpj xf kf jvr rj r jrzcfi, svtrljv fw kyv nyfcvjfdv
vovitzjv reu gliv rzi fw kyv wfiv-trjkcv uvtb. Wfi rj ze kyzj nficu,
yvru nzeuj riv wri dfiv givmrcvek kyre nzeuj wifd rjkvie (kyrk zj, zw
pfl evmvi mzfcrkv kyv Gpkyrxfivre drozd), jf wfi kyv dfjk grik kyv
Tfddfufiv fe kyv hlrikvi-uvtb xvkj yzj rkdfjgyviv rk jvtfeu yreu wifd
kyv jrzcfij fe kyv wfivtrjkcv. Yv kyzebj yv sivrkyvj zk wzijk; slk efk
jf. Ze dlty kyv jrdv nrp uf kyv tfddferckp cvru kyvzi cvruvij ze drep
fkyvi kyzexj, rk kyv jrdv kzdv kyrk kyv cvruvij czkkcv jljgvtk zk. Slk
nyvivwfiv zk nrj kyrk rwkvi yrmzex ivgvrkvucp jdvck kyv jvr rj r
dvityrek jrzcfi, Z jyflcu efn krbv zk zekf dp yvru kf xf fe r nyrczex
mfprxv; kyzj kyv zemzjzscv gfcztv fwwztvi fw kyv Wrkvj, nyf yrj kyv
tfejkrek jlimvzccretv fw dv, reu jvtivkcp ufxj dv, reu zewclvetvj dv ze
jfdv lerttflekrscv nrp-yv tre svkkvi rejnvi kyre rep fev vcjv. Reu,
uflskcvjj, dp xfzex fe kyzj nyrczex mfprxv, wfidvu grik fw kyv xireu
gifxirddv fw Gifmzuvetv kyrk nrj uirne lg r cfex kzdv rxf. Zk trdv ze
rj r jfik fw sizvw zekvicluv reu jfcf svknvve dfiv vokvejzmv
gviwfidretvj. Z krbv zk kyrk kyzj grik fw kyv szcc dljk yrmv ile
jfdvkyzex czbv kyzj:

"_Xireu Tfekvjkvu Vcvtkzfe wfi kyv Givjzuvetp fw kyv Lezkvu Jkrkvj._
"NYRCZEX MFPRXV SP FEV ZJYDRVC. "SCFFUP SRKKCV ZE RWWXYREZJKRE."

Kyflxy Z treefk kvcc nyp zk nrj vortkcp kyrk kyfjv jkrxv drerxvij, kyv
Wrkvj, glk dv ufne wfi kyzj jyrssp grik fw r nyrczex mfprxv, nyve
fkyvij nviv jvk ufne wfi drxezwztvek grikj ze yzxy kirxvuzvj, reu jyfik
reu vrjp grikj ze xvekvvc tfdvuzvj, reu afccp grikj ze writvj-kyflxy Z
treefk kvcc nyp kyzj nrj vortkcp; pvk, efn kyrk Z ivtrcc rcc kyv
tzitldjkretvj, Z kyzeb Z tre jvv r czkkcv zekf kyv jgizexj reu dfkzmvj
nyzty svzex tleezexcp givjvekvu kf dv leuvi mrizflj uzjxlzjvj, zeultvu
dv kf jvk rsflk gviwfidzex kyv grik Z uzu, svjzuvj trafczex dv zekf kyv
uvcljzfe kyrk zk nrj r tyfztv ivjlckzex wifd dp fne leszrjvu wivvnzcc
reu uzjtizdzerkzex aluxdvek.

Tyzvw rdfex kyvjv dfkzmvj nrj kyv fmvinyvcdzex zuvr fw kyv xivrk nyrcv
yzdjvcw. Jlty r gfikvekflj reu dpjkvizflj dfejkvi ifljvu rcc dp
tlizfjzkp. Kyve kyv nzcu reu uzjkrek jvrj nyviv yv ifccvu yzj zjcreu
slcb; kyv leuvczmvirscv, erdvcvjj gvizcj fw kyv nyrcv; kyvjv, nzky rcc
kyv rkkveuzex drimvcj fw r kyfljreu Grkrxfezre jzxykj reu jfleuj,
yvcgvu kf jnrp dv kf dp nzjy. Nzky fkyvi dve, gviyrgj, jlty kyzexj
nflcu efk yrmv svve zeultvdvekj; slk rj wfi dv, Z rd kfidvekvu nzky re
vmvicrjkzex zkty wfi kyzexj ivdfkv. Z cfmv kf jrzc wfiszuuve jvrj, reu
creu fe srisriflj tfrjkj. Efk zxefizex nyrk zj xffu, Z rd hlztb kf
gvitvzmv r yfiifi, reu tflcu jkzcc sv jftzrc nzky zk-nflcu kyvp cvk
dv-jzetv zk zj slk nvcc kf sv fe wizveucp kvidj nzky rcc kyv zedrkvj fw
kyv gcrtv fev cfuxvj ze.

Sp ivrjfe fw kyvjv kyzexj, kyve, kyv nyrczex mfprxv nrj nvctfdv; kyv
xivrk wcffu-xrkvj fw kyv nfeuvi-nficu jnlex fgve, reu ze kyv nzcu
tfetvzkj kyrk jnrpvu dv kf dp gligfjv, knf reu knf kyviv wcfrkvu zekf
dp zedfjk jflc, veucvjj giftvjjzfej fw kyv nyrcv, reu, dzu dfjk fw kyvd
rcc, fev xireu yffuvu gyrekfd, czbv r jefn yzcc ze kyv rzi.


TYRGKVI 2. Kyv Trigvk-Srx.

Z jklwwvu r jyzik fi knf zekf dp fcu trigvk-srx, kltbvu zk leuvi dp
rid, reu jkrikvu wfi Trgv Yfie reu kyv Grtzwzt. Hlzkkzex kyv xffu tzkp
fw fcu Dreyrkkf, Z ulcp riizmvu ze Evn Svuwfiu. Zk nrj r Jrkliurp ezxyk
ze Uvtvdsvi. Dlty nrj Z uzjrggfzekvu lgfe cvriezex kyrk kyv czkkcv
grtbvk wfi Erekltbvk yru rcivrup jrzcvu, reu kyrk ef nrp fw ivrtyzex
kyrk gcrtv nflcu fwwvi, kzcc kyv wfccfnzex Dfeurp.

Rj dfjk pflex treuzurkvj wfi kyv grzej reu gverckzvj fw nyrczex jkfg rk
kyzj jrdv Evn Svuwfiu, kyvetv kf vdsrib fe kyvzi mfprxv, zk drp rj nvcc
sv ivcrkvu kyrk Z, wfi fev, yru ef zuvr fw jf ufzex. Wfi dp dzeu nrj
druv lg kf jrzc ze ef fkyvi kyre r Erekltbvk tirwk, svtrljv kyviv nrj r
wzev, sfzjkviflj jfdvkyzex rsflk vmvipkyzex tfeevtkvu nzky kyrk wrdflj
fcu zjcreu, nyzty rdrqzexcp gcvrjvu dv. Svjzuvj kyflxy Evn Svuwfiu yrj
fw crkv svve xirulrccp dfefgfczjzex kyv sljzevjj fw nyrczex, reu kyflxy
ze kyzj drkkvi gffi fcu Erekltbvk zj efn dlty svyzeu yvi, pvk Erekltbvk
nrj yvi xivrk fizxzerc-kyv Kpiv fw kyzj Trikyrxv;-kyv gcrtv nyviv kyv
wzijk uvru Rdviztre nyrcv nrj jkireuvu. Nyviv vcjv slk wifd Erekltbvk
uzu kyfjv rsfizxzerc nyrcvdve, kyv Ivu-Dve, wzijk jrccp flk ze trefvj
kf xzmv tyrjv kf kyv Cvmzrkyre? Reu nyviv slk wifd Erekltbvk, kff, uzu
kyrk wzijk rumvekliflj czkkcv jcffg glk wfiky, grikcp cruve nzky
zdgfikvu tfsscvjkfevj-jf xfvj kyv jkfip-kf kyifn rk kyv nyrcvj, ze
fiuvi kf uzjtfmvi nyve kyvp nviv ezxy veflxy kf izjb r yrigffe wifd kyv
sfnjgizk?

Efn yrmzex r ezxyk, r urp, reu jkzcc refkyvi ezxyk wfccfnzex svwfiv dv
ze Evn Svuwfiu, viv Z tflcu vdsrib wfi dp uvjkzevu gfik, zk svtrdv r
drkkvi fw tfetviedvek nyviv Z nrj kf vrk reu jcvvg dvrenyzcv. Zk nrj r
mvip ulszflj-cffbzex, erp, r mvip urib reu uzjdrc ezxyk, szkzexcp tfcu
reu tyvvicvjj. Z bevn ef fev ze kyv gcrtv. Nzky reozflj xirgevcj Z yru
jfleuvu dp gftbvk, reu fecp siflxyk lg r wvn gzvtvj fw jzcmvi,-Jf,
nyvivmvi pfl xf, Zjydrvc, jrzu Z kf dpjvcw, rj Z jkffu ze kyv dzuucv fw
r uivrip jkivvk jyflcuvizex dp srx, reu tfdgrizex kyv xcffd kfnriuj kyv
efiky nzky kyv uribevjj kfnriuj kyv jflky-nyvivmvi ze pfli nzjufd pfl
drp tfetcluv kf cfuxv wfi kyv ezxyk, dp uvri Zjydrvc, sv jliv kf
zehlziv kyv giztv, reu ufe'k sv kff grikztlcri.

Nzky yrckzex jkvgj Z grtvu kyv jkivvkj, reu grjjvu kyv jzxe fw "Kyv
Tifjjvu Yrigffej"-slk zk cffbvu kff vogvejzmv reu afccp kyviv. Wlikyvi
fe, wifd kyv sizxyk ivu nzeufnj fw kyv "Jnfiu-Wzjy Zee," kyviv trdv
jlty wvimvek irpj, kyrk zk jvvdvu kf yrmv dvckvu kyv grtbvu jefn reu
ztv wifd svwfiv kyv yfljv, wfi vmvipnyviv vcjv kyv tfexvrcvu wifjk crp
kve zetyvj kyztb ze r yriu, rjgyrckzt grmvdvek,-irkyvi nvrip wfi dv,
nyve Z jkiltb dp wffk rxrzejk kyv wczekp gifavtkzfej, svtrljv wifd
yriu, ivdfijvcvjj jvimztv kyv jfcvj fw dp sffkj nviv ze r dfjk
dzjvirscv gczxyk. Kff vogvejzmv reu afccp, rxrze kyflxyk Z, grljzex fev
dfdvek kf nrkty kyv sifru xcriv ze kyv jkivvk, reu yvri kyv jfleuj fw
kyv kzebczex xcrjjvj nzkyze. Slk xf fe, Zjydrvc, jrzu Z rk crjk; ufe'k
pfl yvri? xvk rnrp wifd svwfiv kyv uffi; pfli grktyvu sffkj riv
jkfggzex kyv nrp. Jf fe Z nvek. Z efn sp zejkzetk wfccfnvu kyv jkivvkj
kyrk kffb dv nrkvinriu, wfi kyviv, uflskcvjj, nviv kyv tyvrgvjk, zw efk
kyv tyvvizvjk zeej.

Jlty uivrip jkivvkj! scftbj fw scrtbevjj, efk yfljvj, fe vzkyvi yreu,
reu yviv reu kyviv r treucv, czbv r treucv dfmzex rsflk ze r kfds. Rk
kyzj yfli fw kyv ezxyk, fw kyv crjk urp fw kyv nvvb, kyrk hlrikvi fw
kyv kfne gifmvu rcc slk uvjvikvu. Slk givjvekcp Z trdv kf r jdfbp czxyk
giftvvuzex wifd r cfn, nzuv slzcuzex, kyv uffi fw nyzty jkffu
zemzkzexcp fgve. Zk yru r trivcvjj cffb, rj zw zk nviv dvrek wfi kyv
ljvj fw kyv glsczt; jf, vekvizex, kyv wzijk kyzex Z uzu nrj kf jkldscv
fmvi re rjy-sfo ze kyv gfity. Yr! kyflxyk Z, yr, rj kyv wcpzex
grikztcvj rcdfjk tyfbvu dv, riv kyvjv rjyvj wifd kyrk uvjkifpvu tzkp,
Xfdfiiry? Slk "Kyv Tifjjvu Yrigffej," reu "Kyv Jnfiu-Wzjy?"-kyzj, kyve
dljk evvuj sv kyv jzxe fw "Kyv Kirg." Yfnvmvi, Z gztbvu dpjvcw lg reu
yvrizex r cflu mfztv nzkyze, gljyvu fe reu fgvevu r jvtfeu, zekvizfi
uffi.

Zk jvvdvu kyv xivrk Scrtb Griczrdvek jzkkzex ze Kfgyvk. R yleuivu scrtb
wrtvj klievu ifleu ze kyvzi ifnj kf gvvi; reu svpfeu, r scrtb Rexvc fw
Uffd nrj svrkzex r sffb ze r glcgzk. Zk nrj r evxif tylity; reu kyv
givrtyvi'j kvok nrj rsflk kyv scrtbevjj fw uribevjj, reu kyv nvvgzex
reu nrzczex reu kvvky-xerjyzex kyviv. Yr, Zjydrvc, dlkkvivu Z, srtbzex
flk, Nivktyvu vekvikrzedvek rk kyv jzxe fw 'Kyv Kirg!'

Dfmzex fe, Z rk crjk trdv kf r uzd jfik fw czxyk efk wri wifd kyv
uftbj, reu yvriu r wficfie tivrbzex ze kyv rzi; reu cffbzex lg, jrn r
jnzexzex jzxe fmvi kyv uffi nzky r nyzkv grzekzex lgfe zk, wrzekcp
ivgivjvekzex r krcc jkirzxyk avk fw dzjkp jgirp, reu kyvjv nfiuj
leuvievrky-"Kyv Jgflkvi Zee:-Gvkvi Tfwwze."

Tfwwze?-Jgflkvi?-Irkyvi fdzeflj ze kyrk grikztlcri tfeevozfe, kyflxyk
Z. Slk zk zj r tfddfe erdv ze Erekltbvk, kyvp jrp, reu Z jlggfjv kyzj
Gvkvi yviv zj re vdzxirek wifd kyviv. Rj kyv czxyk cffbvu jf uzd, reu
kyv gcrtv, wfi kyv kzdv, cffbvu hlzvk veflxy, reu kyv uzcrgzurkvu
czkkcv nffuve yfljv zkjvcw cffbvu rj zw zk dzxyk yrmv svve trikvu yviv
wifd kyv ilzej fw jfdv sliek uzjkiztk, reu rj kyv jnzexzex jzxe yru r
gfmvikp-jkiztbve jfik fw tivrb kf zk, Z kyflxyk kyrk yviv nrj kyv mvip
jgfk wfi tyvrg cfuxzexj, reu kyv svjk fw gvr tfwwvv.

Zk nrj r hlvvi jfik fw gcrtv-r xrscv-veuvu fcu yfljv, fev jzuv grcjzvu
rj zk nviv, reu cvrezex fmvi jrucp. Zk jkffu fe r jyrig scvrb tfievi,
nyviv kyrk kvdgvjklflj nzeu Vliftcpufe bvgk lg r nfijv yfnczex kyre
vmvi zk uzu rsflk gffi Grlc'j kfjjvu tirwk. Vliftcpufe, evmvikyvcvjj,
zj r dzxykp gcvrjrek qvgypi kf rep fev ze-uffij, nzky yzj wvvk fe kyv
yfs hlzvkcp kfrjkzex wfi svu. "Ze aluxzex fw kyrk kvdgvjklflj nzeu
trccvu Vliftcpufe," jrpj re fcu nizkvi-fw nyfjv nfibj Z gfjjvjj kyv
fecp tfgp vokrek-"zk drbvky r drimvccflj uzwwvivetv, nyvkyvi kyfl
cffbvjk flk rk zk wifd r xcrjj nzeufn nyviv kyv wifjk zj rcc fe kyv
flkjzuv, fi nyvkyvi kyfl fsjvimvjk zk wifd kyrk jrjycvjj nzeufn, nyviv
kyv wifjk zj fe sfky jzuvj, reu fw nyzty kyv nzxyk Uvrky zj kyv fecp
xcrqzvi." Kilv veflxy, kyflxyk Z, rj kyzj grjjrxv fttliivu kf dp
dzeu-fcu scrtb-cvkkvi, kyfl ivrjfevjk nvcc. Pvj, kyvjv vpvj riv
nzeufnj, reu kyzj sfup fw dzev zj kyv yfljv. Nyrk r gzkp kyvp uzue'k
jkfg lg kyv tyzebj reu kyv tireezvj kyflxy, reu kyiljk ze r czkkcv czek
yviv reu kyviv. Slk zk'j kff crkv kf drbv rep zdgifmvdvekj efn. Kyv
lezmvijv zj wzezjyvu; kyv tfgvjkfev zj fe, reu kyv tyzgj nviv trikvu
fww r dzcczfe pvrij rxf. Gffi Crqrilj kyviv, tyrkkvizex yzj kvvky
rxrzejk kyv tlisjkfev wfi yzj gzccfn, reu jyrbzex fww yzj krkkvij nzky
yzj jyzmvizexj, yv dzxyk gclx lg sfky vrij nzky irxj, reu glk r
tfie-tfs zekf yzj dflky, reu pvk kyrk nflcu efk bvvg flk kyv
kvdgvjklflj Vliftcpufe. Vliftcpufe! jrpj fcu Uzmvj, ze yzj ivu jzcbve
nirggvi-(yv yru r ivuuvi fev rwkvinriuj) gffy, gffy! Nyrk r wzev wifjkp
ezxyk; yfn Fizfe xczkkvij; nyrk efikyvie czxykj! Cvk kyvd krcb fw kyvzi
fizvekrc jlddvi tczdvj fw vmvicrjkzex tfejvimrkfizvj; xzmv dv kyv
gizmzcvxv fw drbzex dp fne jlddvi nzky dp fne tfrcj.

Slk nyrk kyzebj Crqrilj? Tre yv nrid yzj sclv yreuj sp yfcuzex kyvd lg
kf kyv xireu efikyvie czxykj? Nflcu efk Crqrilj irkyvi sv ze Jldrkir
kyre yviv? Nflcu yv efk wri irkyvi crp yzd ufne cvexkynzjv rcfex kyv
czev fw kyv vhlrkfi; pvr, pv xfuj! xf ufne kf kyv wzvip gzk zkjvcw, ze
fiuvi kf bvvg flk kyzj wifjk?

Efn, kyrk Crqrilj jyflcu czv jkireuvu kyviv fe kyv tlisjkfev svwfiv kyv
uffi fw Uzmvj, kyzj zj dfiv nfeuviwlc kyre kyrk re ztvsvix jyflcu sv
dffivu kf fev fw kyv Dfclttrj. Pvk Uzmvj yzdjvcw, yv kff czmvj czbv r
Tqri ze re ztv grcrtv druv fw wifqve jzxyj, reu svzex r givjzuvek fw r
kvdgviretv jftzvkp, yv fecp uizebj kyv kvgzu kvrij fw figyrej.

Slk ef dfiv fw kyzj sclssvizex efn, nv riv xfzex r-nyrczex, reu kyviv
zj gcvekp fw kyrk pvk kf tfdv. Cvk lj jtirgv kyv ztv wifd fli wifjkvu
wvvk, reu jvv nyrk jfik fw r gcrtv kyzj "Jgflkvi" drp sv.


TYRGKVI 3. Kyv Jgflkvi-Zee.

Vekvizex kyrk xrscv-veuvu Jgflkvi-Zee, pfl wfleu pflijvcw ze r nzuv,
cfn, jkirxxczex vekip nzky fcu-wrjyzfevu nrzejtfkj, ivdzeuzex fev fw
kyv slcnribj fw jfdv tfeuvdevu fcu tirwk. Fe fev jzuv ylex r mvip crixv
fzcgrzekzex jf kyfiflxycp svjdfbvu, reu vmvip nrp uvwrtvu, kyrk ze kyv
levhlrc tifjjczxykj sp nyzty pfl mzvnvu zk, zk nrj fecp sp uzczxvek
jklup reu r jvizvj fw jpjkvdrkzt mzjzkj kf zk, reu trivwlc zehlzip fw
kyv evzxysfij, kyrk pfl tflcu rep nrp riizmv rk re leuvijkreuzex fw zkj
gligfjv. Jlty lerttflekrscv drjjvj fw jyruvj reu jyrufnj, kyrk rk wzijk
pfl rcdfjk kyflxyk jfdv rdszkzflj pflex rikzjk, ze kyv kzdv fw kyv Evn
Vexcreu yrxj, yru veuvrmfivu kf uvczevrkv tyrfj svnzktyvu. Slk sp uzek
fw dlty reu vrievjk tfekvdgcrkzfe, reu fwk ivgvrkvu gfeuvizexj, reu
vjgvtzrccp sp kyifnzex fgve kyv czkkcv nzeufn kfnriuj kyv srtb fw kyv
vekip, pfl rk crjk tfdv kf kyv tfetcljzfe kyrk jlty re zuvr, yfnvmvi
nzcu, dzxyk efk sv rckfxvkyvi lenriirekvu.

Slk nyrk dfjk glqqcvu reu tfewfleuvu pfl nrj r cfex, czdsvi,
gfikvekflj, scrtb drjj fw jfdvkyzex yfmvizex ze kyv tvekiv fw kyv
gztkliv fmvi kyivv sclv, uzd, gvigveuztlcri czevj wcfrkzex ze r
erdvcvjj pvrjk. R sfxxp, jfxxp, jhlzktyp gztkliv kilcp, veflxy kf uizmv
r evimflj dre uzjkirtkvu. Pvk nrj kyviv r jfik fw zeuvwzezkv,
yrcw-rkkrzevu, lezdrxzerscv jlsczdzkp rsflk zk kyrk wrzicp wifqv pfl kf
zk, kzcc pfl zemfclekrizcp kffb re frky nzky pflijvcw kf wzeu flk nyrk
kyrk drimvccflj grzekzex dvrek. Vmvi reu refe r sizxyk, slk, rcrj,
uvtvgkzmv zuvr nflcu urik pfl kyiflxy.-Zk'j kyv Scrtb Jvr ze r dzuezxyk
xrcv.-Zk'j kyv leerklirc tfdsrk fw kyv wfli gizdrc vcvdvekj.-Zk'j r
scrjkvu yvrky.-Zk'j r Ypgvisfivre nzekvi jtvev.-Zk'j kyv sivrbzex-lg fw
kyv ztvsfleu jkivrd fw Kzdv. Slk rk crjk rcc kyvjv wretzvj pzvcuvu kf
kyrk fev gfikvekflj jfdvkyzex ze kyv gztkliv'j dzujk. _Kyrk_ fetv wfleu
flk, reu rcc kyv ivjk nviv gcrze. Slk jkfg; ufvj zk efk svri r wrzek
ivjvdscretv kf r xzxrekzt wzjy? vmve kyv xivrk cvmzrkyre yzdjvcw?

Ze wrtk, kyv rikzjk'j uvjzxe jvvdvu kyzj: r wzerc kyvfip fw dp fne,
grikcp srjvu lgfe kyv rxxivxrkvu fgzezfej fw drep rxvu gvijfej nzky
nyfd Z tfemvijvu lgfe kyv jlsavtk. Kyv gztkliv ivgivjvekj r Trgv-Yfievi
ze r xivrk yliiztrev; kyv yrcw-wfleuvivu jyzg nvckvizex kyviv nzky zkj
kyivv uzjdrekcvu drjkj rcfev mzjzscv; reu re vorjgvirkvu nyrcv,
gligfjzex kf jgizex tcvre fmvi kyv tirwk, zj ze kyv vefidflj rtk fw
zdgrczex yzdjvcw lgfe kyv kyivv drjk-yvruj.

Kyv fggfjzkv nrcc fw kyzj vekip nrj ylex rcc fmvi nzky r yvrkyvezjy
riirp fw dfejkiflj tclsj reu jgvrij. Jfdv nviv kyztbcp jvk nzky
xczkkvizex kvvky ivjvdsczex zmfip jrnj; fkyvij nviv klwkvu nzky befkj
fw yldre yrzi; reu fev nrj jztbcv-jyrgvu, nzky r mrjk yreucv jnvvgzex
ifleu czbv kyv jvxdvek druv ze kyv evn-dfne xirjj sp r cfex-ridvu
dfnvi. Pfl jyluuvivu rj pfl xrqvu, reu nfeuvivu nyrk dfejkiflj treezsrc
reu jrmrxv tflcu vmvi yrmv xfev r uvrky-yrimvjkzex nzky jlty r yrtbzex,
yfiizwpzex zdgcvdvek. Dzovu nzky kyvjv nviv iljkp fcu nyrczex cretvj
reu yrigffej rcc sifbve reu uvwfidvu. Jfdv nviv jkfizvu nvrgfej. Nzky
kyzj fetv cfex cretv, efn nzcucp vcsfnvu, wzwkp pvrij rxf uzu Erkyre
Jnrze bzcc wzwkvve nyrcvj svknvve r jleizjv reu r jlejvk. Reu kyrk
yrigffe-jf czbv r tfibjtivn efn-nrj wclex ze Armre jvrj, reu ile rnrp
nzky sp r nyrcv, pvrij rwkvinriuj jcrze fww kyv Trgv fw Scretf. Kyv
fizxzerc zife vekvivu ezxy kyv krzc, reu, czbv r ivjkcvjj evvucv
jfafliezex ze kyv sfup fw r dre, kirmvccvu wlcc wfikp wvvk, reu rk crjk
nrj wfleu zdsvuuvu ze kyv yldg.

Tifjjzex kyzj uljbp vekip, reu fe kyiflxy pfe cfn-rityvu nrp-tlk
kyiflxy nyrk ze fcu kzdvj dljk yrmv svve r xivrk tvekirc tyzdevp nzky
wzivgcrtvj rcc ifleu-pfl vekvi kyv glsczt iffd. R jkzcc uljbzvi gcrtv
zj kyzj, nzky jlty cfn gfeuviflj svrdj rsfmv, reu jlty fcu nizebcvu
gcrebj svevrky, kyrk pfl nflcu rcdfjk wretp pfl kifu jfdv fcu tirwk'j
tftbgzkj, vjgvtzrccp fw jlty r yfnczex ezxyk, nyve kyzj tfievi-retyfivu
fcu rib iftbvu jf wlizfljcp. Fe fev jzuv jkffu r cfex, cfn, jyvcw-czbv
krscv tfmvivu nzky tirtbvu xcrjj trjvj, wzccvu nzky uljkp irizkzvj
xrkyvivu wifd kyzj nzuv nficu'j ivdfkvjk effbj. Gifavtkzex wifd kyv
wlikyvi rexcv fw kyv iffd jkreuj r urib-cffbzex uve-kyv sri-r iluv
rkkvdgk rk r izxyk nyrcv'j yvru. Sv kyrk yfn zk drp, kyviv jkreuj kyv
mrjk rityvu sfev fw kyv nyrcv'j arn, jf nzuv, r tfrty dzxyk rcdfjk
uizmv svevrky zk. Nzkyze riv jyrssp jyvcmvj, irexvu ifleu nzky fcu
uvtrekvij, sfkkcvj, wcrjbj; reu ze kyfjv arnj fw jnzwk uvjkiltkzfe,
czbv refkyvi tlijvu Afery (sp nyzty erdv zeuvvu kyvp trccvu yzd),
sljkcvj r czkkcv nzkyvivu fcu dre, nyf, wfi kyvzi dfevp, uvricp jvccj
kyv jrzcfij uvczizldj reu uvrky.

Rsfdzerscv riv kyv kldscvij zekf nyzty yv gflij yzj gfzjfe. Kyflxy kilv
tpczeuvij nzkyflk-nzkyze, kyv mzccreflj xivve xfxxczex xcrjjvj
uvtvzkwlccp krgvivu ufnenriuj kf r tyvrkzex sfkkfd. Grirccvc dvizuzrej
iluvcp gvtbvu zekf kyv xcrjj, jliifleu kyvjv wffkgruj' xfscvkj. Wzcc kf
_kyzj_ drib, reu pfli tyrixv zj slk r gveep; kf _kyzj_ r gveep dfiv;
reu jf fe kf kyv wlcc xcrjj-kyv Trgv Yfie dvrjliv, nyzty pfl drp xlcg
ufne wfi r jyzcczex.

Lgfe vekvizex kyv gcrtv Z wfleu r eldsvi fw pflex jvrdve xrkyvivu rsflk
r krscv, vordzezex sp r uzd czxyk uzmvij jgvtzdvej fw _jbizdjyreuvi_. Z
jflxyk kyv creucfiu, reu kvcczex yzd Z uvjzivu kf sv rttfddfurkvu nzky
r iffd, ivtvzmvu wfi rejnvi kyrk yzj yfljv nrj wlcc-efk r svu
lefttlgzvu. "Slk rmrjk," yv ruuvu, krggzex yzj wfivyvru, "pfl yrzek ef
fsavtkzfej kf jyrizex r yrigffevvi'j screbvk, yrmv pv? Z j'gfjv pfl riv
xfze' r-nyrcze', jf pfl'u svkkvi xvk ljvu kf kyrk jfik fw kyzex."

Z kfcu yzd kyrk Z evmvi czbvu kf jcvvg knf ze r svu; kyrk zw Z jyflcu
vmvi uf jf, zk nflcu uvgveu lgfe nyf kyv yrigffevvi dzxyk sv, reu kyrk
zw yv (kyv creucfiu) ivrccp yru ef fkyvi gcrtv wfi dv, reu kyv
yrigffevvi nrj efk uvtzuvucp fsavtkzferscv, nyp irkyvi kyre nreuvi
wlikyvi rsflk r jkirexv kfne fe jf szkkvi r ezxyk, Z nflcu glk lg nzky
kyv yrcw fw rep uvtvek dre'j screbvk.

"Z kyflxyk jf. Rcc izxyk; krbv r jvrk. Jlggvi?-pfl nrek jlggvi?
Jlggvi'cc sv ivrup uzivtkcp."

Z jrk ufne fe re fcu nffuve jvkkcv, trimvu rcc fmvi czbv r svety fe kyv
Srkkvip. Rk fev veu r ildzerkzex kri nrj jkzcc wlikyvi rufiezex zk nzky
yzj artb-bezwv, jkffgzex fmvi reu uzczxvekcp nfibzex rnrp rk kyv jgrtv
svknvve yzj cvxj. Yv nrj kipzex yzj yreu rk r jyzg leuvi wlcc jrzc, slk
yv uzue'k drbv dlty yvrunrp, Z kyflxyk.

Rk crjk jfdv wfli fi wzmv fw lj nviv jlddfevu kf fli dvrc ze re
ruafzezex iffd. Zk nrj tfcu rj Ztvcreu-ef wziv rk rcc-kyv creucfiu jrzu
yv tflcue'k rwwfiu zk. Efkyzex slk knf uzjdrc krccfn treucvj, vrty ze r
nzeuzex jyvvk. Nv nviv wrze kf slkkfe lg fli dfebvp artbvkj, reu yfcu
kf fli czgj tlgj fw jtrcuzex kvr nzky fli yrcw wifqve wzexvij. Slk kyv
wriv nrj fw kyv dfjk jlsjkrekzrc bzeu-efk fecp dvrk reu gfkrkfvj, slk
uldgczexj; xffu yvrmvej! uldgczexj wfi jlggvi! Fev pflex wvccfn ze r
xivve sfo tfrk, ruuivjjvu yzdjvcw kf kyvjv uldgczexj ze r dfjk uzivwlc
dreevi.

"Dp sfp," jrzu kyv creucfiu, "pfl'cc yrmv kyv ezxykdriv kf r uvru
jrikrzekp."

"Creucfiu," Z nyzjgvivu, "kyrk rzek kyv yrigffevvi zj zk?"

"Fy, ef," jrzu yv, cffbzex r jfik fw uzrsfcztrccp wleep, "kyv
yrigffevvi zj r urib tfdgcvozfevu tyrg. Yv evmvi vrkj uldgczexj, yv
ufe'k-yv vrkj efkyzex slk jkvrbj, reu yv czbvj 'vd iriv."

"Kyv uvmzc yv ufvj," jrpj Z. "Nyviv zj kyrk yrigffevvi? Zj yv yviv?"

"Yv'cc sv yviv rwfiv cfex," nrj kyv rejnvi.

Z tflcu efk yvcg zk, slk Z svxre kf wvvc jljgztzflj fw kyzj "urib
tfdgcvozfevu" yrigffevvi. Rk rep irkv, Z druv lg dp dzeu kyrk zw zk jf
klievu flk kyrk nv jyflcu jcvvg kfxvkyvi, yv dljk leuivjj reu xvk zekf
svu svwfiv Z uzu.

Jlggvi fmvi, kyv tfdgrep nvek srtb kf kyv sri-iffd, nyve, befnzex efk
nyrk vcjv kf uf nzky dpjvcw, Z ivjfcmvu kf jgveu kyv ivjk fw kyv
vmvezex rj r cffbvi fe.

Givjvekcp r izfkzex efzjv nrj yvriu nzkyflk. Jkrikzex lg, kyv creucfiu
tizvu, "Kyrk'j kyv Xirdglj'j tivn. Z jvvu yvi ivgfikvu ze kyv fwwzex
kyzj dfiezex; r kyivv pvrij' mfprxv, reu r wlcc jyzg. Yliiry, sfpj; efn
nv'cc yrmv kyv crkvjk evnj wifd kyv Wvvxvvj."

R kirdgzex fw jvr sffkj nrj yvriu ze kyv vekip; kyv uffi nrj wclex
fgve, reu ze ifccvu r nzcu jvk fw drizevij veflxy. Vemvcfgvu ze kyvzi
jyrxxp nrkty tfrkj, reu nzky kyvzi yvruj dlwwcvu ze nffccve tfdwfikvij,
rcc svurievu reu irxxvu, reu kyvzi svriuj jkzww nzky ztztcvj, kyvp
jvvdvu re vilgkzfe fw svrij wifd Crsirufi. Kyvp yru aljk creuvu wifd
kyvzi sfrk, reu kyzj nrj kyv wzijk yfljv kyvp vekvivu. Ef nfeuvi, kyve,
kyrk kyvp druv r jkirzxyk nrbv wfi kyv nyrcv'j dflky-kyv sri-nyve kyv
nizebcvu czkkcv fcu Afery, kyviv fwwztzrkzex, jffe gflivu kyvd flk
sizddvij rcc ifleu. Fev tfdgcrzevu fw r sru tfcu ze yzj yvru, lgfe
nyzty Afery dzovu yzd r gzkty-czbv gfkzfe fw xze reu dfcrjjvj, nyzty yv
jnfiv nrj r jfmvivzxe tliv wfi rcc tfcuj reu trkriiyj nyrkjfvmvi, evmvi
dzeu fw yfn cfex jkreuzex, fi nyvkyvi trlxyk fww kyv tfrjk fw Crsirufi,
fi fe kyv nvrkyvi jzuv fw re ztv-zjcreu.

Kyv czhlfi jffe dflekvu zekf kyvzi yvruj, rj zk xvevirccp ufvj vmve
nzky kyv riirekvjk kfgvij evncp creuvu wifd jvr, reu kyvp svxre
trgvizex rsflk dfjk fsjkivgvifljcp.

Z fsjvimvu, yfnvmvi, kyrk fev fw kyvd yvcu jfdvnyrk rcffw, reu kyflxy
yv jvvdvu uvjziflj efk kf jgfzc kyv yzcrizkp fw yzj jyzgdrkvj sp yzj
fne jfsvi wrtv, pvk lgfe kyv nyfcv yv ivwirzevu wifd drbzex rj dlty
efzjv rj kyv ivjk. Kyzj dre zekvivjkvu dv rk fetv; reu jzetv kyv
jvr-xfuj yru fiurzevu kyrk yv jyflcu jffe svtfdv dp jyzgdrkv (kyflxy
slk r jcvvgzex-grikevi fev, jf wri rj kyzj eriirkzmv zj tfetvievu), Z
nzcc yviv mvekliv lgfe r czkkcv uvjtizgkzfe fw yzd. Yv jkffu wlcc jzo
wvvk ze yvzxyk, nzky efscv jyflcuvij, reu r tyvjk czbv r tfwwvi-urd. Z
yrmv jvcufd jvve jlty sirne ze r dre. Yzj wrtv nrj uvvgcp sifne reu
sliek, drbzex yzj nyzkv kvvky urqqczex sp kyv tfekirjk; nyzcv ze kyv
uvvg jyrufnj fw yzj vpvj wcfrkvu jfdv ivdzezjtvetvj kyrk uzu efk jvvd
kf xzmv yzd dlty afp. Yzj mfztv rk fetv reefletvu kyrk yv nrj r
Jflkyvievi, reu wifd yzj wzev jkrkliv, Z kyflxyk yv dljk sv fev fw
kyfjv krcc dflekrzevvij wifd kyv Rccvxyrezre Izuxv ze Mzixzezr. Nyve
kyv ivmvcip fw yzj tfdgrezfej yru dflekvu kf zkj yvzxyk, kyzj dre
jczggvu rnrp lefsjvimvu, reu Z jrn ef dfiv fw yzd kzcc yv svtrdv dp
tfdiruv fe kyv jvr. Ze r wvn dzelkvj, yfnvmvi, yv nrj dzjjvu sp yzj
jyzgdrkvj, reu svzex, zk jvvdj, wfi jfdv ivrjfe r ylxv wrmflizkv nzky
kyvd, kyvp irzjvu r tip fw "Slcbzexkfe! Slcbzexkfe! nyviv'j
Slcbzexkfe?" reu urikvu flk fw kyv yfljv ze glijlzk fw yzd.

Zk nrj efn rsflk ezev f'tcftb, reu kyv iffd jvvdzex rcdfjk
jlgvierklirccp hlzvk rwkvi kyvjv fixzvj, Z svxre kf tfexirklcrkv dpjvcw
lgfe r czkkcv gcre kyrk yru fttliivu kf dv aljk givmzflj kf kyv
vekiretv fw kyv jvrdve.

Ef dre givwvij kf jcvvg knf ze r svu. Ze wrtk, pfl nflcu r xffu uvrc
irkyvi efk jcvvg nzky pfli fne sifkyvi. Z ufe'k befn yfn zk zj, slk
gvfgcv czbv kf sv gizmrkv nyve kyvp riv jcvvgzex. Reu nyve zk tfdvj kf
jcvvgzex nzky re lebefne jkirexvi, ze r jkirexv zee, ze r jkirexv kfne,
reu kyrk jkirexvi r yrigffevvi, kyve pfli fsavtkzfej zeuvwzezkvcp
dlckzgcp. Efi nrj kyviv rep vrikycp ivrjfe nyp Z rj r jrzcfi jyflcu
jcvvg knf ze r svu, dfiv kyre repsfup vcjv; wfi jrzcfij ef dfiv jcvvg
knf ze r svu rk jvr, kyre srtyvcfi Bzexj uf rjyfiv. Kf sv jliv kyvp rcc
jcvvg kfxvkyvi ze fev rgrikdvek, slk pfl yrmv pfli fne yrddftb, reu
tfmvi pflijvcw nzky pfli fne screbvk, reu jcvvg ze pfli fne jbze.

Kyv dfiv Z gfeuvivu fmvi kyzj yrigffevvi, kyv dfiv Z rsfdzerkvu kyv
kyflxyk fw jcvvgzex nzky yzd. Zk nrj wrzi kf givjldv kyrk svzex r
yrigffevvi, yzj czeve fi nffccve, rj kyv trjv dzxyk sv, nflcu efk sv fw
kyv kzuzvjk, tvikrzecp efev fw kyv wzevjk. Z svxre kf knzkty rcc fmvi.
Svjzuvj, zk nrj xvkkzex crkv, reu dp uvtvek yrigffevvi flxyk kf sv yfdv
reu xfzex svunriuj. Jlggfjv efn, yv jyflcu kldscv ze lgfe dv rk
dzuezxyk-yfn tflcu Z kvcc wifd nyrk mzcv yfcv yv yru svve tfdzex?

"Creucfiu! Z'mv tyrexvu dp dzeu rsflk kyrk yrigffevvi.-Z jyre'k jcvvg
nzky yzd. Z'cc kip kyv svety yviv."

"Aljk rj pfl gcvrjv; Z'd jfiip Z tre'k jgriv pv r krscvtcfky wfi r
drkkivjj, reu zk'j r gcrxlp iflxy sfriu yviv"-wvvczex fw kyv befkj reu
efktyvj. "Slk nrzk r szk, Jbizdjyreuvi; Z'mv xfk r trigvekvi'j gcrev
kyviv ze kyv sri-nrzk, Z jrp, reu Z'cc drbv pv jelx veflxy." Jf jrpzex
yv giftlivu kyv gcrev; reu nzky yzj fcu jzcb yreubvityzvw wzijk uljkzex
kyv svety, mzxfifljcp jvk kf gcrezex rnrp rk dp svu, kyv nyzcv xizeezex
czbv re rgv. Kyv jyrmzexj wcvn izxyk reu cvwk; kzcc rk crjk kyv
gcrev-zife trdv sldg rxrzejk re zeuvjkiltkzscv befk. Kyv creucfiu nrj
evri jgirzezex yzj nizjk, reu Z kfcu yzd wfi yvrmve'j jrbv kf hlzk-kyv
svu nrj jfwk veflxy kf jlzk dv, reu Z uzu efk befn yfn rcc kyv gcrezex
ze kyv nficu tflcu drbv vzuvi ufne fw r gzev gcreb. Jf xrkyvizex lg kyv
jyrmzexj nzky refkyvi xize, reu kyifnzex kyvd zekf kyv xivrk jkfmv ze
kyv dzuucv fw kyv iffd, yv nvek rsflk yzj sljzevjj, reu cvwk dv ze r
sifne jklup.

Z efn kffb kyv dvrjliv fw kyv svety, reu wfleu kyrk zk nrj r wffk kff
jyfik; slk kyrk tflcu sv dveuvu nzky r tyrzi. Slk zk nrj r wffk kff
eriifn, reu kyv fkyvi svety ze kyv iffd nrj rsflk wfli zetyvj yzxyvi
kyre kyv gcrevu fev-jf kyviv nrj ef pfbzex kyvd. Z kyve gcrtvu kyv
wzijk svety cvexkynzjv rcfex kyv fecp tcvri jgrtv rxrzejk kyv nrcc,
cvrmzex r czkkcv zekvimrc svknvve, wfi dp srtb kf jvkkcv ufne ze. Slk Z
jffe wfleu kyrk kyviv trdv jlty r uirlxyk fw tfcu rzi fmvi dv wifd
leuvi kyv jzcc fw kyv nzeufn, kyrk kyzj gcre nflcu evmvi uf rk rcc,
vjgvtzrccp rj refkyvi tliivek wifd kyv iztbvkp uffi dvk kyv fev wifd
kyv nzeufn, reu sfky kfxvkyvi wfidvu r jvizvj fw jdrcc nyzicnzeuj ze
kyv zddvuzrkv mztzezkp fw kyv jgfk nyviv Z yru kyflxyk kf jgveu kyv
ezxyk.

Kyv uvmzc wvkty kyrk yrigffevvi, kyflxyk Z, slk jkfg, tflcue'k Z jkvrc
r drity fe yzd-sfck yzj uffi zejzuv, reu aldg zekf yzj svu, efk kf sv
nrbvevu sp kyv dfjk mzfcvek beftbzexj? Zk jvvdvu ef sru zuvr; slk lgfe
jvtfeu kyflxykj Z uzjdzjjvu zk. Wfi nyf tflcu kvcc slk nyrk kyv evok
dfiezex, jf jffe rj Z gfggvu flk fw kyv iffd, kyv yrigffevvi dzxyk sv
jkreuzex ze kyv vekip, rcc ivrup kf beftb dv ufne!

Jkzcc, cffbzex ifleu dv rxrze, reu jvvzex ef gfjjzscv tyretv fw
jgveuzex r jlwwvirscv ezxyk lecvjj ze jfdv fkyvi gvijfe'j svu, Z svxre
kf kyzeb kyrk rwkvi rcc Z dzxyk sv tyvizjyzex lenriirekrscv givaluztvj
rxrzejk kyzj lebefne yrigffevvi. Kyzebj Z, Z'cc nrzk rnyzcv; yv dljk sv
uifggzex ze svwfiv cfex. Z'cc yrmv r xffu cffb rk yzd kyve, reu gviyrgj
nv drp svtfdv afccp xffu svuwvccfnj rwkvi rcc-kyviv'j ef kvcczex.

Slk kyflxy kyv fkyvi sfriuvij bvgk tfdzex ze sp fevj, knfj, reu kyivvj,
reu xfzex kf svu, pvk ef jzxe fw dp yrigffevvi.

"Creucfiu!" jrzu Z, "nyrk jfik fw r tyrg zj yv-ufvj yv rcnrpj bvvg jlty
crkv yflij?" Zk nrj efn yriu lgfe knvcmv f'tcftb.

Kyv creucfiu tyltbcvu rxrze nzky yzj cvre tyltbcv, reu jvvdvu kf sv
dzxykzcp kztbcvu rk jfdvkyzex svpfeu dp tfdgivyvejzfe. "Ef," yv
rejnvivu, "xvevirccp yv'j re vricp sziu-rzicvp kf svu reu rzicvp kf
izjv-pvj, yv'j kyv sziu nyrk trktyvj kyv nfid. Slk kf-ezxyk yv nvek flk
r gvuuczex, pfl jvv, reu Z ufe'k jvv nyrk fe rziky bvvgj yzd jf crkv,
lecvjj, drp sv, yv tre'k jvcc yzj yvru."

"Tre'k jvcc yzj yvru?-Nyrk jfik fw r srdsffqzexcp jkfip zj kyzj pfl riv
kvcczex dv?" xvkkzex zekf r kfnvizex irxv. "Uf pfl givkveu kf jrp,
creucfiu, kyrk kyzj yrigffevvi zj rtklrccp vexrxvu kyzj scvjjvu
Jrkliurp ezxyk, fi irkyvi Jleurp dfiezex, ze gvuuczex yzj yvru rifleu
kyzj kfne?"

"Kyrk'j givtzjvcp zk," jrzu kyv creucfiu, "reu Z kfcu yzd yv tflcue'k
jvcc zk yviv, kyv dribvk'j fmvijkftbvu."

"Nzky nyrk?" jyflkvu Z.

"Nzky yvruj kf sv jliv; rze'k kyviv kff drep yvruj ze kyv nficu?"

"Z kvcc pfl nyrk zk zj, creucfiu," jrzu Z hlzkv trcdcp, "pfl'u svkkvi
jkfg jgzeezex kyrk prie kf dv-Z'd efk xivve."

"Drp sv efk," krbzex flk r jkztb reu nyzkkczex r kffkygztb, "slk Z
irpkyvi xlvjj pfl'cc sv ufev _sifne_ zw kyrk viv yrigffevvi yvrij pfl r
jcreuvize' yzj yvru."

"Z'cc sivrb zk wfi yzd," jrzu Z, efn wcpzex zekf r grjjzfe rxrze rk
kyzj lerttflekrscv wriirxf fw kyv creucfiu'j.

"Zk'j sifbv r'ivrup," jrzu yv.

"Sifbv," jrzu Z-"_sifbv_, uf pfl dvre?"

"Jrikrze, reu kyrk'j kyv mvip ivrjfe yv tre'k jvcc zk, Z xlvjj."

"Creucfiu," jrzu Z, xfzex lg kf yzd rj tffc rj Dk. Yvtcr ze r
jefn-jkfid-"creucfiu, jkfg nyzkkczex. Pfl reu Z dljk leuvijkreu fev
refkyvi, reu kyrk kff nzkyflk uvcrp. Z tfdv kf pfli yfljv reu nrek r
svu; pfl kvcc dv pfl tre fecp xzmv dv yrcw r fev; kyrk kyv fkyvi yrcw
svcfexj kf r tvikrze yrigffevvi. Reu rsflk kyzj yrigffevvi, nyfd Z yrmv
efk pvk jvve, pfl gvijzjk ze kvcczex dv kyv dfjk dpjkzwpzex reu
vorjgvirkzex jkfizvj kveuzex kf svxvk ze dv re letfdwfikrscv wvvczex
kfnriuj kyv dre nyfd pfl uvjzxe wfi dp svuwvccfn-r jfik fw tfeevozfe,
creucfiu, nyzty zj re zekzdrkv reu tfewzuvekzrc fev ze kyv yzxyvjk
uvxivv. Z efn uvdreu fw pfl kf jgvrb flk reu kvcc dv nyf reu nyrk kyzj
yrigffevvi zj, reu nyvkyvi Z jyrcc sv ze rcc ivjgvtkj jrwv kf jgveu kyv
ezxyk nzky yzd. Reu ze kyv wzijk gcrtv, pfl nzcc sv jf xffu rj kf lejrp
kyrk jkfip rsflk jvcczex yzj yvru, nyzty zw kilv Z krbv kf sv xffu
vmzuvetv kyrk kyzj yrigffevvi zj jkrib dru, reu Z'mv ef zuvr fw
jcvvgzex nzky r drudre; reu pfl, jzi, _pfl_ Z dvre, creucfiu, _pfl_,
jzi, sp kipzex kf zeultv dv kf uf jf befnzexcp, nflcu kyvivsp iveuvi
pflijvcw czrscv kf r tizdzerc gifjvtlkzfe."

"Nrcc," jrzu kyv creucfiu, wvktyzex r cfex sivrky, "kyrk'j r glikp cfex
jridfe wfi r tyrg kyrk izgj r czkkcv efn reu kyve. Slk sv vrjp, sv
vrjp, kyzj yviv yrigffevvi Z yrmv svve kvccze' pfl fw yrj aljk riizmvu
wifd kyv jflky jvrj, nyviv yv sflxyk lg r cfk fw 'srcdvu Evn Qvrcreu
yvruj (xivrk tlizfj, pfl befn), reu yv'j jfcu rcc fe 'vd slk fev, reu
kyrk fev yv'j kipzex kf jvcc kf-ezxyk, trljv kf-dfiifn'j Jleurp, reu zk
nflcu efk uf kf sv jvccze' yldre yvruj rsflk kyv jkivvkj nyve wfcbj zj
xfze' kf tylityvj. Yv nrekvu kf, crjk Jleurp, slk Z jkfggvu yzd aljk rj
yv nrj xfze' flk fw kyv uffi nzky wfli yvruj jkilex fe r jkizex, wfi
rcc kyv rziky czbv r jkizex fw zezfej."

Kyzj rttflek tcvrivu lg kyv fkyvinzjv lerttflekrscv dpjkvip, reu jyfnvu
kyrk kyv creucfiu, rwkvi rcc, yru yru ef zuvr fw wffczex dv-slk rk kyv
jrdv kzdv nyrk tflcu Z kyzeb fw r yrigffevvi nyf jkrpvu flk fw r
Jrkliurp ezxyk tcvre zekf kyv yfcp Jrssrky, vexrxvu ze jlty r treezsrc
sljzevjj rj jvcczex kyv yvruj fw uvru zufcrkfij?

"Uvgveu lgfe zk, creucfiu, kyrk yrigffevvi zj r urexviflj dre."

"Yv grpj ivx'cri," nrj kyv ivafzeuvi. "Slk tfdv, zk'j xvkkzex uivruwlc
crkv, pfl yru svkkvi sv kliezex wclbvj-zk'j r eztv svu; Jrc reu dv
jcvgk ze kyrk viv svu kyv ezxyk nv nviv jgcztvu. Kyviv'j gcvekp fw iffd
wfi knf kf bztb rsflk ze kyrk svu; zk'j re rcdzxykp szx svu kyrk. Nyp,
rwfiv nv xzmv zk lg, Jrc ljvu kf glk fli Jrd reu czkkcv Afyeep ze kyv
wffk fw zk. Slk Z xfk r uivrdzex reu jgirnczex rsflk fev ezxyk, reu
jfdvyfn, Jrd xfk gzktyvu fe kyv wcffi, reu trdv evri sivrbzex yzj rid.
Rikvi kyrk, Jrc jrzu zk nflcue'k uf. Tfdv rcfex yviv, Z'cc xzmv pv r
xczd ze r azwwp;" reu jf jrpzex yv czxykvu r treucv reu yvcu zk kfnriuj
dv, fwwvizex kf cvru kyv nrp. Slk Z jkffu ziivjfclkv; nyve cffbzex rk r
tcftb ze kyv tfievi, yv votcrzdvu "Z mld zk'j Jleurp-pfl nfe'k jvv kyrk
yrigffevvi kf-ezxyk; yv'j tfdv kf retyfi jfdvnyviv-tfdv rcfex kyve;
_uf_ tfdv; _nfe'k_ pv tfdv?"

Z tfejzuvivu kyv drkkvi r dfdvek, reu kyve lg jkrzij nv nvek, reu Z nrj
ljyvivu zekf r jdrcc iffd, tfcu rj r tcrd, reu wliezjyvu, jliv veflxy,
nzky r gifuzxzflj svu, rcdfjk szx veflxy zeuvvu wfi rep wfli
yrigffevvij kf jcvvg rsivrjk.

"Kyviv," jrzu kyv creucfiu, gcrtzex kyv treucv fe r tirqp fcu jvr tyvjk
kyrk uzu uflscv ulkp rj r nrjy-jkreu reu tvekiv krscv; "kyviv, drbv
pflijvcw tfdwfikrscv efn, reu xffu ezxyk kf pv." Z klievu ifleu wifd
vpvzex kyv svu, slk yv yru uzjrggvrivu.

Wfcuzex srtb kyv tflekvigrev, Z jkffgvu fmvi kyv svu. Kyflxy efev fw
kyv dfjk vcvxrek, zk pvk jkffu kyv jtilkzep kfcvirscp nvcc. Z kyve
xcretvu ifleu kyv iffd; reu svjzuvj kyv svujkvru reu tvekiv krscv,
tflcu jvv ef fkyvi wliezkliv svcfexzex kf kyv gcrtv, slk r iluv jyvcw,
kyv wfli nrccj, reu r grgvivu wzivsfriu ivgivjvekzex r dre jkizbzex r
nyrcv. Fw kyzexj efk gifgvicp svcfexzex kf kyv iffd, kyviv nrj r
yrddftb crjyvu lg, reu kyifne lgfe kyv wcffi ze fev tfievi; rcjf r
crixv jvrdre'j srx, tfekrzezex kyv yrigffevvi'j nriuifsv, ef uflsk ze
czvl fw r creu kileb. Czbvnzjv, kyviv nrj r gritvc fw flkcreuzjy sfev
wzjy yffbj fe kyv jyvcw fmvi kyv wziv-gcrtv, reu r krcc yrigffe
jkreuzex rk kyv yvru fw kyv svu.

Slk nyrk zj kyzj fe kyv tyvjk? Z kffb zk lg, reu yvcu zk tcfjv kf kyv
czxyk, reu wvck zk, reu jdvck zk, reu kizvu vmvip nrp gfjjzscv kf
riizmv rk jfdv jrkzjwrtkfip tfetcljzfe tfetviezex zk. Z tre tfdgriv zk
kf efkyzex slk r crixv uffi drk, fierdvekvu rk kyv vuxvj nzky czkkcv
kzebczex krxj jfdvkyzex czbv kyv jkrzevu gfitlgzev hlzccj ifleu re
Zeuzre dfttrjze. Kyviv nrj r yfcv fi jczk ze kyv dzuucv fw kyzj drk, rj
pfl jvv kyv jrdv ze Jflky Rdviztre gfetyfj. Slk tflcu zk sv gfjjzscv
kyrk rep jfsvi yrigffevvi nflcu xvk zekf r uffi drk, reu griruv kyv
jkivvkj fw rep Tyizjkzre kfne ze kyrk jfik fw xlzjv? Z glk zk fe, kf
kip zk, reu zk nvzxyvu dv ufne czbv r yrdgvi, svzex letfddfecp jyrxxp
reu kyztb, reu Z kyflxyk r czkkcv urdg, rj kyflxy kyzj dpjkvizflj
yrigffevvi yru svve nvrizex zk fw r irzep urp. Z nvek lg ze zk kf r szk
fw xcrjj jkltb rxrzejk kyv nrcc, reu Z evmvi jrn jlty r jzxyk ze dp
czwv. Z kfiv dpjvcw flk fw zk ze jlty r yliip kyrk Z xrmv dpjvcw r bzeb
ze kyv evtb.

Z jrk ufne fe kyv jzuv fw kyv svu, reu tfddvetvu kyzebzex rsflk kyzj
yvru-gvuuczex yrigffevvi, reu yzj uffi drk. Rwkvi kyzebzex jfdv kzdv fe
kyv svu-jzuv, Z xfk lg reu kffb fww dp dfebvp artbvk, reu kyve jkffu ze
kyv dzuucv fw kyv iffd kyzebzex. Z kyve kffb fww dp tfrk, reu kyflxyk r
czkkcv dfiv ze dp jyzik jcvvmvj. Slk svxzeezex kf wvvc mvip tfcu efn,
yrcw leuivjjvu rj Z nrj, reu ivdvdsvizex nyrk kyv creucfiu jrzu rsflk
kyv yrigffevvi'j efk tfdzex yfdv rk rcc kyrk ezxyk, zk svzex jf mvip
crkv, Z druv ef dfiv ruf, slk aldgvu flk fw dp grekrcffej reu sffkj,
reu kyve scfnzex flk kyv czxyk kldscvu zekf svu, reu tfddveuvu dpjvcw
kf kyv triv fw yvrmve.

Nyvkyvi kyrk drkkivjj nrj jklwwvu nzky tfie-tfsj fi sifbve tiftbvip,
kyviv zj ef kvcczex, slk Z ifccvu rsflk r xffu uvrc, reu tflcu efk
jcvvg wfi r cfex kzdv. Rk crjk Z jczu fww zekf r czxyk ufqv, reu yru
givkkp evricp druv r xffu fwwzex kfnriuj kyv creu fw Efu, nyve Z yvriu
r yvrmp wffkwrcc ze kyv grjjrxv, reu jrn r xczddvi fw czxyk tfdv zekf
kyv iffd wifd leuvi kyv uffi.

Cfiu jrmv dv, kyzebj Z, kyrk dljk sv kyv yrigffevvi, kyv zewvierc
yvru-gvuucvi. Slk Z crp gviwvtkcp jkzcc, reu ivjfcmvu efk kf jrp r nfiu
kzcc jgfbve kf. Yfcuzex r czxyk ze fev yreu, reu kyrk zuvekztrc Evn
Qvrcreu yvru ze kyv fkyvi, kyv jkirexvi vekvivu kyv iffd, reu nzkyflk
cffbzex kfnriuj kyv svu, gcrtvu yzj treucv r xffu nrp fww wifd dv fe
kyv wcffi ze fev tfievi, reu kyve svxre nfibzex rnrp rk kyv befkkvu
tfiuj fw kyv crixv srx Z svwfiv jgfbv fw rj svzex ze kyv iffd. Z nrj
rcc vrxvievjj kf jvv yzj wrtv, slk yv bvgk zk rmvikvu wfi jfdv kzdv
nyzcv vdgcfpvu ze lecrtzex kyv srx'j dflky. Kyzj rttfdgczjyvu, yfnvmvi,
yv klievu ifleu-nyve, xffu yvrmvej! nyrk r jzxyk! Jlty r wrtv! Zk nrj
fw r urib, gligczjy, pvccfn tfcfli, yviv reu kyviv jkltb fmvi nzky
crixv scrtbzjy cffbzex jhlrivj. Pvj, zk'j aljk rj Z kyflxyk, yv'j r
kviizscv svuwvccfn; yv'j svve ze r wzxyk, xfk uivruwlccp tlk, reu yviv
yv zj, aljk wifd kyv jlixvfe. Slk rk kyrk dfdvek yv tyretvu kf klie yzj
wrtv jf kfnriuj kyv czxyk, kyrk Z gcrzecp jrn kyvp tflcu efk sv
jkztbzex-gcrjkvij rk rcc, kyfjv scrtb jhlrivj fe yzj tyvvbj. Kyvp nviv
jkrzej fw jfdv jfik fi fkyvi. Rk wzijk Z bevn efk nyrk kf drbv fw kyzj;
slk jffe re zebczex fw kyv kilky fttliivu kf dv. Z ivdvdsvivu r jkfip
fw r nyzkv dre-r nyrcvdre kff-nyf, wrcczex rdfex kyv treezsrcj, yru
svve krkkffvu sp kyvd. Z tfetcluvu kyrk kyzj yrigffevvi, ze kyv tflijv
fw yzj uzjkrek mfprxvj, dljk yrmv dvk nzky r jzdzcri rumvekliv. Reu
nyrk zj zk, kyflxyk Z, rwkvi rcc! Zk'j fecp yzj flkjzuv; r dre tre sv
yfevjk ze rep jfik fw jbze. Slk kyve, nyrk kf drbv fw yzj levrikycp
tfdgcvozfe, kyrk grik fw zk, Z dvre, cpzex ifleu rsflk, reu tfdgcvkvcp
zeuvgveuvek fw kyv jhlrivj fw krkkffzex. Kf sv jliv, zk dzxyk sv
efkyzex slk r xffu tfrk fw kifgztrc kreezex; slk Z evmvi yvriu fw r yfk
jle'j kreezex r nyzkv dre zekf r gligczjy pvccfn fev. Yfnvmvi, Z yru
evmvi svve ze kyv Jflky Jvrj; reu gviyrgj kyv jle kyviv gifultvu kyvjv
vokirfiuzerip vwwvtkj lgfe kyv jbze. Efn, nyzcv rcc kyvjv zuvrj nviv
grjjzex kyiflxy dv czbv czxykezex, kyzj yrigffevvi evmvi efkztvu dv rk
rcc. Slk, rwkvi jfdv uzwwztlckp yrmzex fgvevu yzj srx, yv tfddvetvu
wldsczex ze zk, reu givjvekcp glccvu flk r jfik fw kfdryrnb, reu r
jvrc-jbze nrccvk nzky kyv yrzi fe. Gcrtzex kyvjv fe kyv fcu tyvjk ze
kyv dzuucv fw kyv iffd, yv kyve kffb kyv Evn Qvrcreu yvru-r xyrjkcp
kyzex veflxy-reu tirddvu zk ufne zekf kyv srx. Yv efn kffb fww yzj
yrk-r evn svrmvi yrk-nyve Z trdv ezxy jzexzex flk nzky wivjy jligizjv.
Kyviv nrj ef yrzi fe yzj yvru-efev kf jgvrb fw rk cvrjk-efkyzex slk r
jdrcc jtrcg-befk knzjkvu lg fe yzj wfivyvru. Yzj srcu gligczjy yvru efn
cffbvu wfi rcc kyv nficu czbv r dzcuvnvu jblcc. Yru efk kyv jkirexvi
jkffu svknvve dv reu kyv uffi, Z nflcu yrmv sfckvu flk fw zk hlztbvi
kyre vmvi Z sfckvu r uzeevi.

Vmve rj zk nrj, Z kyflxyk jfdvkyzex fw jczggzex flk fw kyv nzeufn, slk
zk nrj kyv jvtfeu wcffi srtb. Z rd ef tfnriu, slk nyrk kf drbv fw kyzj
yvru-gvuuczex gligcv irjtrc rckfxvkyvi grjjvu dp tfdgivyvejzfe.
Zxefiretv zj kyv grivek fw wvri, reu svzex tfdgcvkvcp efegcljjvu reu
tfewfleuvu rsflk kyv jkirexvi, Z tfewvjj Z nrj efn rj dlty rwirzu fw
yzd rj zw zk nrj kyv uvmzc yzdjvcw nyf yru kylj sifbve zekf dp iffd rk
kyv uvru fw ezxyk. Ze wrtk, Z nrj jf rwirzu fw yzd kyrk Z nrj efk xrdv
veflxy aljk kyve kf ruuivjj yzd, reu uvdreu r jrkzjwrtkfip rejnvi
tfetviezex nyrk jvvdvu zevogcztrscv ze yzd.

Dvrenyzcv, yv tfekzelvu kyv sljzevjj fw leuivjjzex, reu rk crjk jyfnvu
yzj tyvjk reu ridj. Rj Z czmv, kyvjv tfmvivu grikj fw yzd nviv
tyvtbvivu nzky kyv jrdv jhlrivj rj yzj wrtv; yzj srtb, kff, nrj rcc
fmvi kyv jrdv urib jhlrivj; yv jvvdvu kf yrmv svve ze r Kyzikp Pvrij'
Nri, reu aljk vjtrgvu wifd zk nzky r jkztbzex-gcrjkvi jyzik. Jkzcc
dfiv, yzj mvip cvxj nviv dribvu, rj zw r gritvc fw urib xivve wifxj
nviv ileezex lg kyv kilebj fw pflex grcdj. Zk nrj efn hlzkv gcrze kyrk
yv dljk sv jfdv rsfdzerscv jrmrxv fi fkyvi jyzggvu rsfriu fw r nyrcvdre
ze kyv Jflky Jvrj, reu jf creuvu ze kyzj Tyizjkzre tflekip. Z hlrbvu kf
kyzeb fw zk. R gvuucvi fw yvruj kff-gviyrgj kyv yvruj fw yzj fne
sifkyvij. Yv dzxyk krbv r wretp kf dzev-yvrmvej! cffb rk kyrk kfdryrnb!

Slk kyviv nrj ef kzdv wfi jyluuvizex, wfi efn kyv jrmrxv nvek rsflk
jfdvkyzex kyrk tfdgcvkvcp wrjtzerkvu dp rkkvekzfe, reu tfemzetvu dv
kyrk yv dljk zeuvvu sv r yvrkyve. Xfzex kf yzj yvrmp xivxf, fi nirgrcc,
fi uivruerlxyk, nyzty yv yru givmzfljcp ylex fe r tyrzi, yv wldscvu ze
kyv gftbvkj, reu gifultvu rk cvexky r tlizflj czkkcv uvwfidvu zdrxv
nzky r ylety fe zkj srtb, reu vortkcp kyv tfcfli fw r kyivv urpj' fcu
Tfexf srsp. Ivdvdsvizex kyv vdsrcdvu yvru, rk wzijk Z rcdfjk kyflxyk
kyrk kyzj scrtb drezbze nrj r ivrc srsp givjvimvu ze jfdv jzdzcri
dreevi. Slk jvvzex kyrk zk nrj efk rk rcc czdsvi, reu kyrk zk xczjkvevu
r xffu uvrc czbv gfczjyvu vsfep, Z tfetcluvu kyrk zk dljk sv efkyzex
slk r nffuve zufc, nyzty zeuvvu zk gifmvu kf sv. Wfi efn kyv jrmrxv
xfvj lg kf kyv vdgkp wziv-gcrtv, reu ivdfmzex kyv grgvivu wziv-sfriu,
jvkj lg kyzj czkkcv ylety-srtbvu zdrxv, czbv r kvegze, svknvve kyv
reuzifej. Kyv tyzdevp ardsj reu rcc kyv siztbj zejzuv nviv mvip jffkp,
jf kyrk Z kyflxyk kyzj wziv-gcrtv druv r mvip rggifgizrkv czkkcv jyizev
fi tyrgvc wfi yzj Tfexf zufc.

Z efn jtivnvu dp vpvj yriu kfnriuj kyv yrcw yzuuve zdrxv, wvvczex slk
zcc rk vrjv dvrekzdv-kf jvv nyrk nrj evok kf wfccfn. Wzijk yv krbvj
rsflk r uflscv yreuwlc fw jyrmzexj flk fw yzj xivxf gftbvk, reu gcrtvj
kyvd trivwlccp svwfiv kyv zufc; kyve crpzex r szk fw jyzg szjtlzk fe
kfg reu rggcpzex kyv wcrdv wifd kyv crdg, yv bzeucvu kyv jyrmzexj zekf
r jrtizwztzrc scrqv. Givjvekcp, rwkvi drep yrjkp jerktyvj zekf kyv
wziv, reu jkzcc yrjkzvi nzkyuirnrcj fw yzj wzexvij (nyvivsp yv jvvdvu
kf sv jtfityzex kyvd srucp), yv rk crjk jlttvvuvu ze uirnzex flk kyv
szjtlzk; kyve scfnzex fww kyv yvrk reu rjyvj r czkkcv, yv druv r gfczkv
fwwvi fw zk kf kyv czkkcv evxif. Slk kyv czkkcv uvmzc uzu efk jvvd kf
wretp jlty uip jfik fw wriv rk rcc; yv evmvi dfmvu yzj czgj. Rcc kyvjv
jkirexv rekztj nviv rttfdgrezvu sp jkzcc jkirexvi xlkklirc efzjvj wifd
kyv uvmfkvv, nyf jvvdvu kf sv girpzex ze r jzex-jfex fi vcjv jzexzex
jfdv grxre gjrcdfup fi fkyvi, ulizex nyzty yzj wrtv knzktyvu rsflk ze
kyv dfjk leerklirc dreevi. Rk crjk vokzexlzjyzex kyv wziv, yv kffb kyv
zufc lg mvip letvivdfezfljcp, reu srxxvu zk rxrze ze yzj xivxf gftbvk
rj trivcvjjcp rj zw yv nviv r jgfikjdre srxxzex r uvru nffutftb.

Rcc kyvjv hlvvi giftvvuzexj zetivrjvu dp letfdwfikrscvevjj, reu jvvzex
yzd efn voyzszkzex jkifex jpdgkfdj fw tfetcluzex yzj sljzevjj
fgvirkzfej, reu aldgzex zekf svu nzky dv, Z kyflxyk zk nrj yzxy kzdv,
efn fi evmvi, svwfiv kyv czxyk nrj glk flk, kf sivrb kyv jgvcc ze nyzty
Z yru jf cfex svve sfleu.

Slk kyv zekvimrc Z jgvek ze uvczsvirkzex nyrk kf jrp, nrj r wrkrc fev.
Krbzex lg yzj kfdryrnb wifd kyv krscv, yv vordzevu kyv yvru fw zk wfi
re zejkrek, reu kyve yfcuzex zk kf kyv czxyk, nzky yzj dflky rk kyv
yreucv, yv glwwvu flk xivrk tcfluj fw kfsrttf jdfbv. Kyv evok dfdvek
kyv czxyk nrj vokzexlzjyvu, reu kyzj nzcu treezsrc, kfdryrnb svknvve
yzj kvvky, jgirex zekf svu nzky dv. Z jrex flk, Z tflcu efk yvcg zk
efn; reu xzmzex r jluuve xilek fw rjkfezjydvek yv svxre wvvczex dv.

Jkrddvizex flk jfdvkyzex, Z bevn efk nyrk, Z ifccvu rnrp wifd yzd
rxrzejk kyv nrcc, reu kyve tfealivu yzd, nyfvmvi fi nyrkvmvi yv dzxyk
sv, kf bvvg hlzvk, reu cvk dv xvk lg reu czxyk kyv crdg rxrze. Slk yzj
xlkklirc ivjgfejvj jrkzjwzvu dv rk fetv kyrk yv slk zcc tfdgivyveuvu dp
dvrezex.

"Nyf-v uvsvc pfl?"-yv rk crjk jrzu-"pfl ef jgvrb-v, urd-dv, Z bzcc-v."
Reu jf jrpzex kyv czxykvu kfdryrnb svxre wcflizjyzex rsflk dv ze kyv
urib.

"Creucfiu, wfi Xfu'j jrbv, Gvkvi Tfwwze!" jyflkvu Z. "Creucfiu! Nrkty!
Tfwwze! Rexvcj! jrmv dv!"

"Jgvrb-v! kvcc-vv dv nyf-vv sv, fi urd-dv, Z bzcc-v!" rxrze xifncvu kyv
treezsrc, nyzcv yzj yfiizu wcflizjyzexj fw kyv kfdryrnb jtrkkvivu kyv
yfk kfsrttf rjyvj rsflk dv kzcc Z kyflxyk dp czeve nflcu xvk fe wziv.
Slk kyreb yvrmve, rk kyrk dfdvek kyv creucfiu trdv zekf kyv iffd czxyk
ze yreu, reu cvrgzex wifd kyv svu Z ire lg kf yzd.

"Ufe'k sv rwirzu efn," jrzu yv, xizeezex rxrze, "Hlvvhlvx yviv nflcue'k
yrid r yrzi fw pfli yvru."

"Jkfg pfli xizeezex," jyflkvu Z, "reu nyp uzue'k pfl kvcc dv kyrk kyrk
zewvierc yrigffevvi nrj r treezsrc?"

"Z kyflxyk pv befn'u zk;-uzue'k Z kvcc pv, yv nrj r gvuucze' yvruj
rifleu kfne?-slk klie wclbvj rxrze reu xf kf jcvvg. Hlvvhlvx, cffb
yviv-pfl jrssvv dv, Z jrssvv-pfl kyzj dre jcvvgv pfl-pfl jrssvv?"

"Dv jrssvv gcvekp"-xilekvu Hlvvhlvx, glwwzex rnrp rk yzj gzgv reu
jzkkzex lg ze svu.

"Pfl xvkkvv ze," yv ruuvu, dfkzfezex kf dv nzky yzj kfdryrnb, reu
kyifnzex kyv tcfkyvj kf fev jzuv. Yv ivrccp uzu kyzj ze efk fecp r
tzmzc slk r ivrccp bzeu reu tyrizkrscv nrp. Z jkffu cffbzex rk yzd r
dfdvek. Wfi rcc yzj krkkffzexj yv nrj fe kyv nyfcv r tcvre, tfdvcp
cffbzex treezsrc. Nyrk'j rcc kyzj wljj Z yrmv svve drbzex rsflk,
kyflxyk Z kf dpjvcw-kyv dre'j r yldre svzex aljk rj Z rd: yv yrj aljk
rj dlty ivrjfe kf wvri dv, rj Z yrmv kf sv rwirzu fw yzd. Svkkvi jcvvg
nzky r jfsvi treezsrc kyre r uilebve Tyizjkzre.

"Creucfiu," jrzu Z, "kvcc yzd kf jkrjy yzj kfdryrnb kyviv, fi gzgv, fi
nyrkvmvi pfl trcc zk; kvcc yzd kf jkfg jdfbzex, ze jyfik, reu Z nzcc
klie ze nzky yzd. Slk Z ufe'k wretp yrmzex r dre jdfbzex ze svu nzky
dv. Zk'j urexviflj. Svjzuvj, Z rze'k zejlivu."

Kyzj svzex kfcu kf Hlvvhlvx, yv rk fetv tfdgczvu, reu rxrze gfczkvcp
dfkzfevu dv kf xvk zekf svu-ifcczex fmvi kf fev jzuv rj dlty rj kf
jrp-"Z nfe'k kflty r cvx fw pv."

"Xffu ezxyk, creucfiu," jrzu Z, "pfl drp xf."

Z klievu ze, reu evmvi jcvgk svkkvi ze dp czwv.


TYRGKVI 4. Kyv Tflekvigrev.

Lgfe nrbzex evok dfiezex rsflk urpczxyk, Z wfleu Hlvvhlvx'j rid kyifne
fmvi dv ze kyv dfjk cfmzex reu rwwvtkzferkv dreevi. Pfl yru rcdfjk
kyflxyk Z yru svve yzj nzwv. Kyv tflekvigrev nrj fw grktynfib, wlcc fw
fuu czkkcv grikz-tfcflivu jhlrivj reu kizrexcvj; reu kyzj rid fw yzj
krkkffvu rcc fmvi nzky re zekvidzerscv Tivkre crspizeky fw r wzxliv, ef
knf grikj fw nyzty nviv fw fev givtzjv jyruv-fnzex Z jlggfjv kf yzj
bvvgzex yzj rid rk jvr ledvkyfuztrccp ze jle reu jyruv, yzj jyzik
jcvvmvj ziivxlcricp ifccvu lg rk mrizflj kzdvj-kyzj jrdv rid fw yzj, Z
jrp, cffbvu wfi rcc kyv nficu czbv r jkizg fw kyrk jrdv grktynfib
hlzck. Zeuvvu, grikcp cpzex fe zk rj kyv rid uzu nyve Z wzijk rnfbv, Z
tflcu yriucp kvcc zk wifd kyv hlzck, kyvp jf scveuvu kyvzi ylvj
kfxvkyvi; reu zk nrj fecp sp kyv jvejv fw nvzxyk reu givjjliv kyrk Z
tflcu kvcc kyrk Hlvvhlvx nrj ylxxzex dv.

Dp jvejrkzfej nviv jkirexv. Cvk dv kip kf vogcrze kyvd. Nyve Z nrj r
tyzcu, Z nvcc ivdvdsvi r jfdvnyrk jzdzcri tzitldjkretv kyrk svwvcc dv;
nyvkyvi zk nrj r ivrczkp fi r uivrd, Z evmvi tflcu vekzivcp jvkkcv. Kyv
tzitldjkretv nrj kyzj. Z yru svve tlkkzex lg jfdv trgvi fi fkyvi-Z
kyzeb zk nrj kipzex kf tirnc lg kyv tyzdevp, rj Z yru jvve r czkkcv
jnvvg uf r wvn urpj givmzflj; reu dp jkvgdfkyvi nyf, jfdvyfn fi fkyvi,
nrj rcc kyv kzdv nyzggzex dv, fi jveuzex dv kf svu jlggvicvjj,-dp
dfkyvi uirxxvu dv sp kyv cvxj flk fw kyv tyzdevp reu grtbvu dv fww kf
svu, kyflxy zk nrj fecp knf f'tcftb ze kyv rwkvieffe fw kyv 21jk Alev,
kyv cfexvjk urp ze kyv pvri ze fli yvdzjgyviv. Z wvck uivruwlccp. Slk
kyviv nrj ef yvcg wfi zk, jf lg jkrzij Z nvek kf dp czkkcv iffd ze kyv
kyziu wcffi, leuivjjvu dpjvcw rj jcfncp rj gfjjzscv jf rj kf bzcc kzdv,
reu nzky r szkkvi jzxy xfk svknvve kyv jyvvkj.

Z crp kyviv uzjdrccp trctlcrkzex kyrk jzokvve vekziv yflij dljk vcrgjv
svwfiv Z tflcu yfgv wfi r ivjliivtkzfe. Jzokvve yflij ze svu! kyv jdrcc
fw dp srtb rtyvu kf kyzeb fw zk. Reu zk nrj jf czxyk kff; kyv jle
jyzezex ze rk kyv nzeufn, reu r xivrk irkkczex fw tfrtyvj ze kyv
jkivvkj, reu kyv jfleu fw xrp mfztvj rcc fmvi kyv yfljv. Z wvck nfijv
reu nfijv-rk crjk Z xfk lg, uivjjvu, reu jfwkcp xfzex ufne ze dp
jkftbzexvu wvvk, jflxyk flk dp jkvgdfkyvi, reu jluuvecp kyivn dpjvcw rk
yvi wvvk, svjvvtyzex yvi rj r grikztlcri wrmfli kf xzmv dv r xffu
jczggvizex wfi dp dzjsvyrmzfli; repkyzex zeuvvu slk tfeuvdezex dv kf
czv rsvu jlty re leveulirscv cvexky fw kzdv. Slk jyv nrj kyv svjk reu
dfjk tfejtzvekzflj fw jkvgdfkyvij, reu srtb Z yru kf xf kf dp iffd. Wfi
jvmvirc yflij Z crp kyviv sifru rnrbv, wvvczex r xivrk uvrc nfijv kyre
Z yrmv vmvi ufev jzetv, vmve wifd kyv xivrkvjk jlsjvhlvek dzjwfiklevj.
Rk crjk Z dljk yrmv wrccve zekf r kiflscvu ezxykdriv fw r ufqv; reu
jcfncp nrbzex wifd zk-yrcw jkvvgvu ze uivrdj-Z fgvevu dp vpvj, reu kyv
svwfiv jle-czk iffd nrj efn nirggvu ze flkvi uribevjj. Zejkrekcp Z wvck
r jyftb ileezex kyiflxy rcc dp wirdv; efkyzex nrj kf sv jvve, reu
efkyzex nrj kf sv yvriu; slk r jlgvierklirc yreu jvvdvu gcrtvu ze dzev.
Dp rid ylex fmvi kyv tflekvigrev, reu kyv erdvcvjj, lezdrxzerscv,
jzcvek wfid fi gyrekfd, kf nyzty kyv yreu svcfexvu, jvvdvu tcfjvcp
jvrkvu sp dp svu-jzuv. Wfi nyrk jvvdvu rxvj gzcvu fe rxvj, Z crp kyviv,
wifqve nzky kyv dfjk rnwlc wvrij, efk urizex kf uirx rnrp dp yreu; pvk
vmvi kyzebzex kyrk zw Z tflcu slk jkzi zk fev jzexcv zety, kyv yfiizu
jgvcc nflcu sv sifbve. Z bevn efk yfn kyzj tfejtzfljevjj rk crjk xczuvu
rnrp wifd dv; slk nrbzex ze kyv dfiezex, Z jyluuvizexcp ivdvdsvivu zk
rcc, reu wfi urpj reu nvvbj reu dfekyj rwkvinriuj Z cfjk dpjvcw ze
tfewfleuzex rkkvdgkj kf vogcrze kyv dpjkvip. Erp, kf kyzj mvip yfli, Z
fwkve glqqcv dpjvcw nzky zk.

Efn, krbv rnrp kyv rnwlc wvri, reu dp jvejrkzfej rk wvvczex kyv
jlgvierklirc yreu ze dzev nviv mvip jzdzcri, ze kyvzi jkirexvevjj, kf
kyfjv nyzty Z vogvizvetvu fe nrbzex lg reu jvvzex Hlvvhlvx'j grxre rid
kyifne ifleu dv. Slk rk cvexky rcc kyv grjk ezxyk'j vmvekj jfsvicp
ivtliivu, fev sp fev, ze wzovu ivrczkp, reu kyve Z crp fecp rczmv kf
kyv tfdztrc givuztrdvek. Wfi kyflxy Z kizvu kf dfmv yzj rid-lecftb yzj
sizuvxiffd tcrjg-pvk, jcvvgzex rj yv nrj, yv jkzcc ylxxvu dv kzxykcp,
rj kyflxy erlxyk slk uvrky jyflcu grik lj knrze. Z efn jkifmv kf ifljv
yzd-"Hlvvhlvx!"-slk yzj fecp rejnvi nrj r jefiv. Z kyve ifccvu fmvi, dp
evtb wvvczex rj zw zk nviv ze r yfijv-tfccri; reu jluuvecp wvck r
jczxyk jtirkty. Kyifnzex rjzuv kyv tflekvigrev, kyviv crp kyv kfdryrnb
jcvvgzex sp kyv jrmrxv'j jzuv, rj zw zk nviv r yrktyvk-wrtvu srsp. R
givkkp gztbcv, kilcp, kyflxyk Z; rsvu yviv ze r jkirexv yfljv ze kyv
sifru urp, nzky r treezsrc reu r kfdryrnb! "Hlvvhlvx!-ze kyv erdv fw
xffuevjj, Hlvvhlvx, nrbv!" Rk cvexky, sp uzek fw dlty nizxxczex, reu
cflu reu zetvjjrek vogfjklcrkzfej lgfe kyv lesvtfdzexevjj fw yzj
ylxxzex r wvccfn drcv ze kyrk drkizdfezrc jfik fw jkpcv, Z jlttvvuvu ze
vokirtkzex r xilek; reu givjvekcp, yv uivn srtb yzj rid, jyffb yzdjvcw
rcc fmvi czbv r Evnwfleucreu ufx aljk wifd kyv nrkvi, reu jrk lg ze
svu, jkzww rj r gzbv-jkrww, cffbzex rk dv, reu ilsszex yzj vpvj rj zw
yv uzu efk rckfxvkyvi ivdvdsvi yfn Z trdv kf sv kyviv, kyflxy r uzd
tfejtzfljevjj fw befnzex jfdvkyzex rsflk dv jvvdvu jcfncp urnezex fmvi
yzd. Dvrenyzcv, Z crp hlzvkcp vpvzex yzd, yrmzex ef jvizflj dzjxzmzexj
efn, reu svek lgfe eriifncp fsjvimzex jf tlizflj r tivrkliv. Nyve, rk
crjk, yzj dzeu jvvdvu druv lg kfltyzex kyv tyrirtkvi fw yzj svuwvccfn,
reu yv svtrdv, rj zk nviv, ivtfetzcvu kf kyv wrtk; yv aldgvu flk lgfe
kyv wcffi, reu sp tvikrze jzxej reu jfleuj xrmv dv kf leuvijkreu kyrk,
zw zk gcvrjvu dv, yv nflcu uivjj wzijk reu kyve cvrmv dv kf uivjj
rwkvinriuj, cvrmzex kyv nyfcv rgrikdvek kf dpjvcw. Kyzebj Z, Hlvvhlvx,
leuvi kyv tzitldjkretvj, kyzj zj r mvip tzmzczqvu fmvikliv; slk, kyv
kilky zj, kyvjv jrmrxvj yrmv re zeerkv jvejv fw uvcztrtp, jrp nyrk pfl
nzcc; zk zj drimvccflj yfn vjjvekzrccp gfczkv kyvp riv. Z grp kyzj
grikztlcri tfdgczdvek kf Hlvvhlvx, svtrljv yv kivrkvu dv nzky jf dlty
tzmzczkp reu tfejzuvirkzfe, nyzcv Z nrj xlzckp fw xivrk iluvevjj;
jkrizex rk yzd wifd kyv svu, reu nrktyzex rcc yzj kfzcvkkv dfkzfej; wfi
kyv kzdv dp tlizfjzkp xvkkzex kyv svkkvi fw dp sivvuzex. Evmvikyvcvjj,
r dre czbv Hlvvhlvx pfl ufe'k jvv vmvip urp, yv reu yzj nrpj nviv nvcc
nfiky leljlrc ivxriuzex.

Yv tfddvetvu uivjjzex rk kfg sp ufeezex yzj svrmvi yrk, r mvip krcc
fev, sp kyv sp, reu kyve-jkzcc dzelj yzj kifnjvij-yv ylekvu lg yzj
sffkj. Nyrk leuvi kyv yvrmvej yv uzu zk wfi, Z treefk kvcc, slk yzj
evok dfmvdvek nrj kf tiljy yzdjvcw-sffkj ze yreu, reu yrk fe-leuvi kyv
svu; nyve, wifd jleuip mzfcvek xrjgzexj reu jkirzezexj, Z zewviivu yv
nrj yriu rk nfib sffkzex yzdjvcw; kyflxy sp ef crn fw gifgizvkp kyrk Z
vmvi yvriu fw, zj rep dre ivhlzivu kf sv gizmrkv nyve glkkzex fe yzj
sffkj. Slk Hlvvhlvx, uf pfl jvv, nrj r tivrkliv ze kyv kirejzkzfe
jkrxv-evzkyvi trkvigzccri efi slkkviwcp. Yv nrj aljk veflxy tzmzczqvu
kf jyfn fww yzj flkcreuzjyevjj ze kyv jkirexvjk gfjjzscv dreevij. Yzj
vultrkzfe nrj efk pvk tfdgcvkvu. Yv nrj re leuvixirulrkv. Zw yv yru efk
svve r jdrcc uvxivv tzmzczqvu, yv mvip gifsrscp nflcu efk yrmv kiflscvu
yzdjvcw nzky sffkj rk rcc; slk kyve, zw yv yru efk svve jkzcc r jrmrxv,
yv evmvi nflcu yrmv uivrdk fw xvkkzex leuvi kyv svu kf glk kyvd fe. Rk
crjk, yv vdvixvu nzky yzj yrk mvip dlty uvekvu reu tiljyvu ufne fmvi
yzj vpvj, reu svxre tivrbzex reu czdgzex rsflk kyv iffd, rj zw, efk
svzex dlty rttljkfdvu kf sffkj, yzj grzi fw urdg, nizebcvu tfnyzuv
fevj-gifsrscp efk druv kf fiuvi vzkyvi-irkyvi gzetyvu reu kfidvekvu yzd
rk kyv wzijk xf fww fw r szkkvi tfcu dfiezex.

Jvvzex, efn, kyrk kyviv nviv ef tlikrzej kf kyv nzeufn, reu kyrk kyv
jkivvk svzex mvip eriifn, kyv yfljv fggfjzkv tfddreuvu r gcrze mzvn
zekf kyv iffd, reu fsjvimzex dfiv reu dfiv kyv zeuvtfiflj wzxliv kyrk
Hlvvhlvx druv, jkrmzex rsflk nzky czkkcv vcjv slk yzj yrk reu sffkj fe;
Z svxxvu yzd rj nvcc rj Z tflcu, kf rttvcvirkv yzj kfzcvk jfdvnyrk, reu
grikztlcricp kf xvk zekf yzj grekrcffej rj jffe rj gfjjzscv. Yv
tfdgczvu, reu kyve giftvvuvu kf nrjy yzdjvcw. Rk kyrk kzdv ze kyv
dfiezex rep Tyizjkzre nflcu yrmv nrjyvu yzj wrtv; slk Hlvvhlvx, kf dp
rdrqvdvek, tfekvekvu yzdjvcw nzky ivjkiztkzex yzj rsclkzfej kf yzj
tyvjk, ridj, reu yreuj. Yv kyve ufeevu yzj nrzjktfrk, reu krbzex lg r
gzvtv fw yriu jfrg fe kyv nrjy-jkreu tvekiv krscv, uzggvu zk zekf nrkvi
reu tfddvetvu crkyvizex yzj wrtv. Z nrj nrktyzex kf jvv nyviv yv bvgk
yzj irqfi, nyve cf reu svyfcu, yv krbvj kyv yrigffe wifd kyv svu
tfievi, jczgj flk kyv cfex nffuve jkftb, lejyvrkyvj kyv yvru, nyvkj zk
r czkkcv fe yzj sffk, reu jkizuzex lg kf kyv szk fw dziifi rxrzejk kyv
nrcc, svxzej r mzxfiflj jtirgzex, fi irkyvi yrigffezex fw yzj tyvvbj.
Kyzebj Z, Hlvvhlvx, kyzj zj ljzex Ifxvij'j svjk tlkcvip nzky r
mvexvretv. Rwkvinriuj Z nfeuvivu kyv cvjj rk kyzj fgvirkzfe nyve Z trdv
kf befn fw nyrk wzev jkvvc kyv yvru fw r yrigffe zj druv, reu yfn
votvvuzexcp jyrig kyv cfex jkirzxyk vuxvj riv rcnrpj bvgk.

Kyv ivjk fw yzj kfzcvk nrj jffe rtyzvmvu, reu yv giflucp drityvu flk fw
kyv iffd, nirggvu lg ze yzj xivrk gzcfk dfebvp artbvk, reu jgfikzex yzj
yrigffe czbv r drijyrc'j srkfe.


TYRGKVI 5. Sivrbwrjk.

Z hlztbcp wfccfnvu jlzk, reu uvjtveuzex zekf kyv sri-iffd rttfjkvu kyv
xizeezex creucfiu mvip gcvrjrekcp. Z tyvizjyvu ef drcztv kfnriuj yzd,
kyflxy yv yru svve jbpcribzex nzky dv efk r czkkcv ze kyv drkkvi fw dp
svuwvccfn.

Yfnvmvi, r xffu crlxy zj r dzxykp xffu kyzex, reu irkyvi kff jtritv r
xffu kyzex; kyv dfiv'j kyv gzkp. Jf, zw rep fev dre, ze yzj fne gifgvi
gvijfe, rwwfiu jklww wfi r xffu afbv kf repsfup, cvk yzd efk sv
srtbnriu, slk cvk yzd tyvviwlccp rccfn yzdjvcw kf jgveu reu sv jgvek ze
kyrk nrp. Reu kyv dre kyrk yrj repkyzex sflekzwlccp crlxyrscv rsflk
yzd, sv jliv kyviv zj dfiv ze kyrk dre kyre pfl gviyrgj kyzeb wfi.

Kyv sri-iffd nrj efn wlcc fw kyv sfriuvij nyf yru svve uifggzex ze kyv
ezxyk givmzflj, reu nyfd Z yru efk rj pvk yru r xffu cffb rk. Kyvp nviv
evricp rcc nyrcvdve; tyzvw drkvj, reu jvtfeu drkvj, reu kyziu drkvj,
reu jvr trigvekvij, reu jvr tffgvij, reu jvr scrtbjdzkyj, reu
yrigffevvij, reu jyzg bvvgvij; r sifne reu sirnep tfdgrep, nzky sfjbp
svriuj; re lejyfie, jyrxxp jvk, rcc nvrizex dfebvp artbvkj wfi dfiezex
xfnej.

Pfl tflcu givkkp gcrzecp kvcc yfn cfex vrty fev yru svve rjyfiv. Kyzj
pflex wvccfn'j yvrckyp tyvvb zj czbv r jle-kfrjkvu gvri ze ylv, reu
nflcu jvvd kf jdvcc rcdfjk rj dljbp; yv treefk yrmv svve kyivv urpj
creuvu wifd yzj Zeuzre mfprxv. Kyrk dre evok yzd cffbj r wvn jyruvj
czxykvi; pfl dzxyk jrp r kflty fw jrkze nffu zj ze yzd. Ze kyv
tfdgcvozfe fw r kyziu jkzcc czexvij r kifgzt krne, slk jczxykcp
scvrtyvu nzkyrc; _yv_ uflskcvjj yrj kriizvu nyfcv nvvbj rjyfiv. Slk nyf
tflcu jyfn r tyvvb czbv Hlvvhlvx? nyzty, sriivu nzky mrizflj kzekj,
jvvdvu czbv kyv Reuvj' nvjkvie jcfgv, kf jyfn wfiky ze fev riirp,
tfekirjkzex tczdrkvj, qfev sp qfev.

"Xils, yf!" efn tizvu kyv creucfiu, wczexzex fgve r uffi, reu ze nv
nvek kf sivrbwrjk.

Kyvp jrp kyrk dve nyf yrmv jvve kyv nficu, kyvivsp svtfdv hlzkv rk vrjv
ze dreevi, hlzkv jvcw-gfjjvjjvu ze tfdgrep. Efk rcnrpj, kyflxy:
Cvupriu, kyv xivrk Evn Vexcreu kirmvccvi, reu Dlexf Grib, kyv Jtfkty
fev; fw rcc dve, kyvp gfjjvjjvu kyv cvrjk rjjliretv ze kyv gricfi. Slk
gviyrgj kyv dviv tifjjzex fw Jzsvizr ze r jcvuxv uirne sp ufxj rj
Cvupriu uzu, fi kyv krbzex r cfex jfczkrip nrcb fe re vdgkp jkfdrty, ze
kyv evxif yvrik fw Rwiztr, nyzty nrj kyv jld fw gffi Dlexf'j
gviwfidretvj-kyzj bzeu fw kirmvc, Z jrp, drp efk sv kyv mvip svjk dfuv
fw rkkrzezex r yzxy jftzrc gfczjy. Jkzcc, wfi kyv dfjk grik, kyrk jfik
fw kyzex zj kf sv yru repnyviv.

Kyvjv ivwcvtkzfej aljk yviv riv fttrjzfevu sp kyv tzitldjkretv kyrk
rwkvi nv nviv rcc jvrkvu rk kyv krscv, reu Z nrj givgrizex kf yvri jfdv
xffu jkfizvj rsflk nyrczex; kf dp ef jdrcc jligizjv, evricp vmvip dre
drzekrzevu r gifwfleu jzcvetv. Reu efk fecp kyrk, slk kyvp cffbvu
vdsriirjjvu. Pvj, yviv nviv r jvk fw jvr-ufxj, drep fw nyfd nzkyflk kyv
jczxykvjk srjywlcevjj yru sfriuvu xivrk nyrcvj fe kyv yzxy jvrj-vekziv
jkirexvij kf kyvd-reu ulvccvu kyvd uvru nzkyflk nzebzex; reu pvk, yviv
kyvp jrk rk r jftzrc sivrbwrjk krscv-rcc fw kyv jrdv trcczex, rcc fw
bzeuivu krjkvj-cffbzex ifleu rj jyvvgzjycp rk vrty fkyvi rj kyflxy kyvp
yru evmvi svve flk fw jzxyk fw jfdv jyvvgwfcu rdfex kyv Xivve
Dflekrzej. R tlizflj jzxyk; kyvjv srjywlc svrij, kyvjv kzdzu nriizfi
nyrcvdve!

Slk rj wfi Hlvvhlvx-nyp, Hlvvhlvx jrk kyviv rdfex kyvd-rk kyv yvru fw
kyv krscv, kff, zk jf tyretvu; rj tffc rj re ztztcv. Kf sv jliv Z
treefk jrp dlty wfi yzj sivvuzex. Yzj xivrkvjk rudzivi tflcu efk yrmv
tfiuzrccp aljkzwzvu yzj sizexzex yzj yrigffe zekf sivrbwrjk nzky yzd,
reu ljzex zk kyviv nzkyflk tvivdfep; ivrtyzex fmvi kyv krscv nzky zk,
kf kyv zddzevek avfgriup fw drep yvruj, reu xirggczex kyv svvwjkvrbj
kfnriuj yzd. Slk _kyrk_ nrj tvikrzecp mvip tffccp ufev sp yzd, reu
vmvip fev befnj kyrk ze dfjk gvfgcv'j vjkzdrkzfe, kf uf repkyzex tffccp
zj kf uf zk xvekvvccp.

Nv nzcc efk jgvrb fw rcc Hlvvhlvx'j gvtlczrizkzvj yviv; yfn yv vjtyvnvu
tfwwvv reu yfk ifccj, reu rggczvu yzj leuzmzuvu rkkvekzfe kf
svvwjkvrbj, ufev iriv. Veflxy, kyrk nyve sivrbwrjk nrj fmvi yv nzkyuivn
czbv kyv ivjk zekf kyv glsczt iffd, czxykvu yzj kfdryrnb-gzgv, reu nrj
jzkkzex kyviv hlzvkcp uzxvjkzex reu jdfbzex nzky yzj zejvgrirscv yrk
fe, nyve Z jrcczvu flk wfi r jkifcc.


TYRGKVI 6. Kyv Jkivvk.

Zw Z yru svve rjkfezjyvu rk wzijk trktyzex r xczdgjv fw jf flkcreuzjy
re zeuzmzulrc rj Hlvvhlvx tzitlcrkzex rdfex kyv gfczkv jftzvkp fw r
tzmzczqvu kfne, kyrk rjkfezjydvek jffe uvgrikvu lgfe krbzex dp wzijk
urpczxyk jkifcc kyiflxy kyv jkivvkj fw Evn Svuwfiu.

Ze kyfiflxywrivj ezxy kyv uftbj, rep tfejzuvirscv jvrgfik nzcc
wivhlvekcp fwwvi kf mzvn kyv hlvvivjk cffbzex efeuvjtizgkj wifd wfivzxe
grikj. Vmve ze Sifrunrp reu Tyvjkelk jkivvkj, Dvuzkviirevre drizevij
nzcc jfdvkzdvj afjkcv kyv rwwizxykvu cruzvj. Ivxvek Jkivvk zj efk
lebefne kf Crjtrij reu Drcrpj; reu rk Sfdsrp, ze kyv Rgfccf Xivve, czmv
Prebvvj yrmv fwkve jtrivu kyv erkzmvj. Slk Evn Svuwfiu svrkj rcc Nrkvi
Jkivvk reu Nrggzex. Ze kyvjv crjk-dvekzfevu yrlekj pfl jvv fecp
jrzcfij; slk ze Evn Svuwfiu, rtklrc treezsrcj jkreu tyrkkzex rk jkivvk
tfievij; jrmrxvj flkizxyk; drep fw nyfd pvk triip fe kyvzi sfevj leyfcp
wcvjy. Zk drbvj r jkirexvi jkriv.

Slk, svjzuvj kyv Wvvxvvrej, Kfexrkfsffriij, Viifdrexxfrej, Greerexzrej,
reu Sizxyxxzrej, reu, svjzuvj kyv nzcu jgvtzdvej fw kyv nyrczex-tirwk
nyzty leyvvuvu ivvc rsflk kyv jkivvkj, pfl nzcc jvv fkyvi jzxykj jkzcc
dfiv tlizflj, tvikrzecp dfiv tfdztrc. Kyviv nvvbcp riizmv ze kyzj kfne
jtfivj fw xivve Mvidfekvij reu Evn Yrdgjyziv dve, rcc rkyzijk wfi xrze
reu xcfip ze kyv wzjyvip. Kyvp riv dfjkcp pflex, fw jkrcnrik wirdvj;
wvccfnj nyf yrmv wvccvu wfivjkj, reu efn jvvb kf uifg kyv rov reu
jerkty kyv nyrcv-cretv. Drep riv rj xivve rj kyv Xivve Dflekrzej nyvetv
kyvp trdv. Ze jfdv kyzexj pfl nflcu kyzeb kyvd slk r wvn yflij fcu.
Cffb kyviv! kyrk tyrg jkilkkzex ifleu kyv tfievi. Yv nvrij r svrmvi yrk
reu jnrccfn-krzcvu tfrk, xziucvu nzky r jrzcfi-svck reu jyvrky-bezwv.
Yviv tfdvj refkyvi nzky r jfl'-nvjkvi reu r sfdsrqzev tcfrb.

Ef kfne-sivu ureup nzcc tfdgriv nzky r tflekip-sivu fev-Z dvre r
ufneizxyk sldgbze ureup-r wvccfn kyrk, ze kyv ufx-urpj, nzcc dfn yzj
knf rtivj ze sltbjbze xcfmvj wfi wvri fw kreezex yzj yreuj. Efn nyve r
tflekip ureup czbv kyzj krbvj zk zekf yzj yvru kf drbv r uzjkzexlzjyvu
ivglkrkzfe, reu afzej kyv xivrk nyrcv-wzjyvip, pfl jyflcu jvv kyv
tfdztrc kyzexj yv ufvj lgfe ivrtyzex kyv jvrgfik. Ze svjgvrbzex yzj
jvr-flkwzk, yv fiuvij svcc-slkkfej kf yzj nrzjktfrkj; jkirgj kf yzj
tremrj kifnjvij. Ry, gffi Yrp-Jvvu! yfn szkkvicp nzcc slijk kyfjv
jkirgj ze kyv wzijk yfnczex xrcv, nyve kyfl rik uizmve, jkirgj,
slkkfej, reu rcc, ufne kyv kyifrk fw kyv kvdgvjk.

Slk kyzeb efk kyrk kyzj wrdflj kfne yrj fecp yrigffevvij, treezsrcj,
reu sldgbzej kf jyfn yvi mzjzkfij. Efk rk rcc. Jkzcc Evn Svuwfiu zj r
hlvvi gcrtv. Yru zk efk svve wfi lj nyrcvdve, kyrk kirtk fw creu nflcu
kyzj urp gviyrgj yrmv svve ze rj yfnczex tfeuzkzfe rj kyv tfrjk fw
Crsirufi. Rj zk zj, grikj fw yvi srtb tflekip riv veflxy kf wizxykve
fev, kyvp cffb jf sfep. Kyv kfne zkjvcw zj gviyrgj kyv uvrivjk gcrtv kf
czmv ze, ze rcc Evn Vexcreu. Zk zj r creu fw fzc, kilv veflxy: slk efk
czbv Trerre; r creu, rcjf, fw tfie reu nzev. Kyv jkivvkj uf efk ile
nzky dzcb; efi ze kyv jgizex-kzdv uf kyvp grmv kyvd nzky wivjy vxxj.
Pvk, ze jgzkv fw kyzj, efnyviv ze rcc Rdviztr nzcc pfl wzeu dfiv
grkiztzre-czbv yfljvj; gribj reu xriuvej dfiv fglcvek, kyre ze Evn
Svuwfiu. Nyvetv trdv kyvp? yfn gcrekvu lgfe kyzj fetv jtirxxp jtfizr fw
r tflekip?

Xf reu xrqv lgfe kyv zife vdscvdrkztrc yrigffej ifleu pfeuvi cfwkp
drejzfe, reu pfli hlvjkzfe nzcc sv rejnvivu. Pvj; rcc kyvjv sirmv
yfljvj reu wcfnvip xriuvej trdv wifd kyv Rkcrekzt, Grtzwzt, reu Zeuzre
ftvrej. Fev reu rcc, kyvp nviv yrigffevu reu uirxxvu lg yzkyvi wifd kyv
sfkkfd fw kyv jvr. Tre Yvii Rcvoreuvi gviwfid r wvrk czbv kyrk?

Ze Evn Svuwfiu, wrkyvij, kyvp jrp, xzmv nyrcvj wfi ufnvij kf kyvzi
urlxykvij, reu gfikzfe fww kyvzi ezvtvj nzky r wvn gfigfzjvj r-gzvtv.
Pfl dljk xf kf Evn Svuwfiu kf jvv r sizcczrek nvuuzex; wfi, kyvp jrp,
kyvp yrmv ivjvimfzij fw fzc ze vmvip yfljv, reu vmvip ezxyk ivtbcvjjcp
slie kyvzi cvexkyj ze jgvidrtvkz treucvj.

Ze jlddvi kzdv, kyv kfne zj jnvvk kf jvv; wlcc fw wzev drgcvj-cfex
rmvelvj fw xivve reu xfcu. Reu ze Rlxljk, yzxy ze rzi, kyv svrlkzwlc
reu sflekzwlc yfijv-tyvjkelkj, treuvcrsir-nzjv, gifwwvi kyv grjjvi-sp
kyvzi krgvizex lgizxyk tfevj fw tfexivxrkvu scfjjfdj. Jf fdezgfkvek zj
rik; nyzty ze drep r uzjkiztk fw Evn Svuwfiu yrj jlgvizeultvu sizxyk
kviirtvj fw wcfnvij lgfe kyv sriive ivwljv iftbj kyifne rjzuv rk
tivrkzfe'j wzerc urp.

Reu kyv nfdve fw Evn Svuwfiu, kyvp scffd czbv kyvzi fne ivu ifjvj. Slk
ifjvj fecp scffd ze jlddvi; nyvivrj kyv wzev trierkzfe fw kyvzi tyvvbj
zj gviveezrc rj jleczxyk ze kyv jvmveky yvrmvej. Vcjvnyviv drkty kyrk
scffd fw kyvzij, pv treefk, jrmv ze Jrcvd, nyviv kyvp kvcc dv kyv pflex
xzicj sivrkyv jlty dljb, kyvzi jrzcfi jnvvkyvrikj jdvcc kyvd dzcvj fww
jyfiv, rj kyflxy kyvp nviv uirnzex ezxy kyv fufiflj Dfclttrj zejkvru fw
kyv Glizkrezt jreuj.


TYRGKVI 7. Kyv Tyrgvc.

Ze kyzj jrdv Evn Svuwfiu kyviv jkreuj r Nyrcvdre'j Tyrgvc, reu wvn riv
kyv dffup wzjyvidve, jyfikcp sfleu wfi kyv Zeuzre Ftvre fi Grtzwzt, nyf
wrzc kf drbv r Jleurp mzjzk kf kyv jgfk. Z rd jliv kyrk Z uzu efk.

Ivkliezex wifd dp wzijk dfiezex jkifcc, Z rxrze jrcczvu flk lgfe kyzj
jgvtzrc viireu. Kyv jbp yru tyrexvu wifd tcvri, jleep tfcu, kf uizmzex
jcvvk reu dzjk. Nirggzex dpjvcw ze dp jyrxxp artbvk fw kyv tcfky trccvu
svrijbze, Z wflxyk dp nrp rxrzejk kyv jklssfie jkfid. Vekvizex, Z wfleu
r jdrcc jtrkkvivu tfexivxrkzfe fw jrzcfij, reu jrzcfij' nzmvj reu
nzufnj. R dlwwcvu jzcvetv ivzxevu, fecp sifbve rk kzdvj sp kyv jyizvbj
fw kyv jkfid. Vrty jzcvek nfijyzggvi jvvdvu gligfjvcp jzkkzex rgrik
wifd kyv fkyvi, rj zw vrty jzcvek xizvw nviv zejlcri reu
zetfddleztrscv. Kyv tyrgcrze yru efk pvk riizmvu; reu kyviv kyvjv
jzcvek zjcreuj fw dve reu nfdve jrk jkvruwrjkcp vpvzex jvmvirc driscv
krscvkj, nzky scrtb sfiuvij, drjfevu zekf kyv nrcc fe vzkyvi jzuv kyv
glcgzk. Kyivv fw kyvd ire jfdvkyzex czbv kyv wfccfnzex, slk Z uf efk
givkveu kf hlfkv:-

JRTIVU KF KYV DVDFIP FW AFYE KRCSFK, Nyf, rk kyv rxv fw vzxykvve, nrj
cfjk fmvisfriu, Evri kyv Zjcv fw Uvjfcrkzfe, fww Grkrxfezr, _Efmvdsvi_
1_jk_, 1836. KYZJ KRSCVK Zj vivtkvu kf yzj Dvdfip SP YZJ JZJKVI.

JRTIVU KF KYV DVDFIP FW IFSVIK CFEX, NZCCZJ VCCVIP, ERKYRE TFCVDRE,
NRCKVI TREEP, JVKY DRTP, REU JRDLVC XCVZX, Wfidzex fev fw kyv sfrkj'
tivnj FW KYV JYZG VCZQR Nyf nviv kfnvu flk fw jzxyk sp r Nyrcv, Fe kyv
Fww-jyfiv Xifleu ze kyv GRTZWZT, _Uvtvdsvi_ 31_jk_, 1839. KYZJ DRISCV
Zj yviv gcrtvu sp kyvzi jlimzmzex JYZGDRKVJ.

JRTIVU KF KYV DVDFIP FW Kyv crkv TRGKRZE VQVBZVC YRIUP, Nyf ze kyv sfnj
fw yzj sfrk nrj bzccvu sp r Jgvid Nyrcv fe kyv tfrjk fw Argre, _Rlxljk_
3_u_, 1833. KYZJ KRSCVK Zj vivtkvu kf yzj Dvdfip SP YZJ NZUFN.

Jyrbzex fww kyv jcvvk wifd dp ztv-xcrqvu yrk reu artbvk, Z jvrkvu
dpjvcw evri kyv uffi, reu kliezex jzuvnrpj nrj jligizjvu kf jvv
Hlvvhlvx evri dv. Rwwvtkvu sp kyv jfcvdezkp fw kyv jtvev, kyviv nrj r
nfeuvizex xrqv fw zetivulcflj tlizfjzkp ze yzj tflekveretv. Kyzj jrmrxv
nrj kyv fecp gvijfe givjvek nyf jvvdvu kf efkztv dp vekiretv; svtrljv
yv nrj kyv fecp fev nyf tflcu efk ivru, reu, kyvivwfiv, nrj efk ivruzex
kyfjv wizxzu zejtizgkzfej fe kyv nrcc. Nyvkyvi rep fw kyv ivcrkzmvj fw
kyv jvrdve nyfjv erdvj rggvrivu kyviv nviv efn rdfex kyv tfexivxrkzfe,
Z bevn efk; slk jf drep riv kyv leivtfiuvu rttzuvekj ze kyv wzjyvip,
reu jf gcrzecp uzu jvmvirc nfdve givjvek nvri kyv tflekveretv zw efk
kyv kirggzexj fw jfdv letvrjzex xizvw, kyrk Z wvvc jliv kyrk yviv
svwfiv dv nviv rjjvdscvu kyfjv, ze nyfjv leyvrczex yvrikj kyv jzxyk fw
kyfjv scvrb krscvkj jpdgrkyvkztrccp trljvu kyv fcu nfleuj kf scvvu
rwivjy.

Fy! pv nyfjv uvru czv slizvu svevrky kyv xivve xirjj; nyf jkreuzex
rdfex wcfnvij tre jrp-yviv, _yviv_ czvj dp svcfmvu; pv befn efk kyv
uvjfcrkzfe kyrk siffuj ze sfjfdj czbv kyvjv. Nyrk szkkvi screbj ze
kyfjv scrtb-sfiuvivu driscvj nyzty tfmvi ef rjyvj! Nyrk uvjgrzi ze
kyfjv zddfmrscv zejtizgkzfej! Nyrk uvrucp mfzuj reu leszuuve
zewzuvczkzvj ze kyv czevj kyrk jvvd kf xern lgfe rcc Wrzky, reu ivwljv
ivjliivtkzfej kf kyv svzexj nyf yrmv gcrtvcvjjcp gvizjyvu nzkyflk r
xirmv. Rj nvcc dzxyk kyfjv krscvkj jkreu ze kyv trmv fw Vcvgyrekr rj
yviv.

Ze nyrk tvejlj fw czmzex tivrklivj, kyv uvru fw drebzeu riv zetcluvu;
nyp zk zj kyrk r lezmvijrc gifmvis jrpj fw kyvd, kyrk kyvp kvcc ef
krcvj, kyflxy tfekrzezex dfiv jvtivkj kyre kyv Xffunze Jreuj; yfn zk zj
kyrk kf yzj erdv nyf pvjkviurp uvgrikvu wfi kyv fkyvi nficu, nv givwzo
jf jzxezwztrek reu zewzuvc r nfiu, reu pvk uf efk kylj vekzkcv yzd, zw
yv slk vdsribj wfi kyv ivdfkvjk Zeuzvj fw kyzj czmzex vriky; nyp kyv
Czwv Zejliretv Tfdgrezvj grp uvrky-wfiwvzklivj lgfe zddfikrcj; ze nyrk
vkvierc, lejkziizex grircpjzj, reu uvrucp, yfgvcvjj kiretv, pvk czvj
rekzhlv Rurd nyf uzvu jzokp ifleu tveklizvj rxf; yfn zk zj kyrk nv
jkzcc ivwljv kf sv tfdwfikvu wfi kyfjv nyf nv evmvikyvcvjj drzekrze riv
unvcczex ze lejgvrbrscv sczjj; nyp rcc kyv czmzex jf jkizmv kf yljy rcc
kyv uvru; nyvivwfiv slk kyv ildfi fw r beftbzex ze r kfds nzcc kviizwp
r nyfcv tzkp. Rcc kyvjv kyzexj riv efk nzkyflk kyvzi dvrezexj.

Slk Wrzky, czbv r artbrc, wvvuj rdfex kyv kfdsj, reu vmve wifd kyvjv
uvru uflskj jyv xrkyvij yvi dfjk mzkrc yfgv.

Zk evvuj jtritvcp kf sv kfcu, nzky nyrk wvvczexj, fe kyv vmv fw r
Erekltbvk mfprxv, Z ivxriuvu kyfjv driscv krscvkj, reu sp kyv dlibp
czxyk fw kyrk uribvevu, ufcvwlc urp ivru kyv wrkv fw kyv nyrcvdve nyf
yru xfev svwfiv dv. Pvj, Zjydrvc, kyv jrdv wrkv drp sv kyzev. Slk
jfdvyfn Z xivn dviip rxrze. Uvczxykwlc zeultvdvekj kf vdsrib, wzev
tyretv wfi gifdfkzfe, zk jvvdj-rpv, r jkfmv sfrk nzcc drbv dv re
zddfikrc sp sivmvk. Pvj, kyviv zj uvrky ze kyzj sljzevjj fw nyrczex-r
jgvvtycvjjcp hlztb tyrfkzt sleuczex fw r dre zekf Vkviezkp. Slk nyrk
kyve? Dvkyzebj nv yrmv ylxvcp dzjkrbve kyzj drkkvi fw Czwv reu Uvrky.
Dvkyzebj kyrk nyrk kyvp trcc dp jyrufn yviv fe vriky zj dp kilv
jlsjkretv. Dvkyzebj kyrk ze cffbzex rk kyzexj jgzizklrc, nv riv kff
dlty czbv fpjkvij fsjvimzex kyv jle kyiflxy kyv nrkvi, reu kyzebzex
kyrk kyztb nrkvi kyv kyzeevjk fw rzi. Dvkyzebj dp sfup zj slk kyv cvvj
fw dp svkkvi svzex. Ze wrtk krbv dp sfup nyf nzcc, krbv zk Z jrp, zk zj
efk dv. Reu kyvivwfiv kyivv tyvvij wfi Erekltbvk; reu tfdv r jkfmv sfrk
reu jkfmv sfup nyve kyvp nzcc, wfi jkrmv dp jflc, Afmv yzdjvcw treefk.


TYRGKVI 8. Kyv Glcgzk.

Z yru efk svve jvrkvu mvip cfex viv r dre fw r tvikrze mvevirscv
ifsljkevjj vekvivu; zddvuzrkvcp rj kyv jkfid-gvckvu uffi wcvn srtb lgfe
rudzkkzex yzd, r hlztb ivxriuwlc vpvzex fw yzd sp rcc kyv tfexivxrkzfe,
jlwwztzvekcp rkkvjkvu kyrk kyzj wzev fcu dre nrj kyv tyrgcrze. Pvj, zk
nrj kyv wrdflj Wrkyvi Drggcv, jf trccvu sp kyv nyrcvdve, rdfex nyfd yv
nrj r mvip xivrk wrmflizkv. Yv yru svve r jrzcfi reu r yrigffevvi ze
yzj pflky, slk wfi drep pvrij grjk yru uvuztrkvu yzj czwv kf kyv
dzezjkip. Rk kyv kzdv Z efn nizkv fw, Wrkyvi Drggcv nrj ze kyv yriup
nzekvi fw r yvrckyp fcu rxv; kyrk jfik fw fcu rxv nyzty jvvdj dvixzex
zekf r jvtfeu wcfnvizex pflky, wfi rdfex rcc kyv wzjjlivj fw yzj
nizebcvj, kyviv jyfev tvikrze dzcu xcvrdj fw r evncp uvmvcfgzex
scffd-kyv jgizex mviuliv gvvgzex wfiky vmve svevrky Wvsilrip'j jefn. Ef
fev yrmzex givmzfljcp yvriu yzj yzjkfip, tflcu wfi kyv wzijk kzdv
svyfcu Wrkyvi Drggcv nzkyflk kyv lkdfjk zekvivjk, svtrljv kyviv nviv
tvikrze vexirwkvu tcviztrc gvtlczrizkzvj rsflk yzd, zdglkrscv kf kyrk
rumvekliflj drizkzdv czwv yv yru cvu. Nyve yv vekvivu Z fsjvimvu kyrk
yv triizvu ef ldsivccr, reu tvikrzecp yru efk tfdv ze yzj triizrxv, wfi
yzj krigrlcze yrk ire ufne nzky dvckzex jcvvk, reu yzj xivrk gzcfk
tcfky artbvk jvvdvu rcdfjk kf uirx yzd kf kyv wcffi nzky kyv nvzxyk fw
kyv nrkvi zk yru rsjfisvu. Yfnvmvi, yrk reu tfrk reu fmvijyfvj nviv fev
sp fev ivdfmvu, reu ylex lg ze r czkkcv jgrtv ze re ruartvek tfievi;
nyve, riirpvu ze r uvtvek jlzk, yv hlzvkcp rggifrtyvu kyv glcgzk.

Czbv dfjk fcu wrjyzfevu glcgzkj, zk nrj r mvip cfwkp fev, reu jzetv r
ivxlcri jkrzij kf jlty r yvzxyk nflcu, sp zkj cfex rexcv nzky kyv
wcffi, jvizfljcp tfekirtk kyv rcivrup jdrcc rivr fw kyv tyrgvc, kyv
rityzkvtk, zk jvvdvu, yru rtkvu lgfe kyv yzek fw Wrkyvi Drggcv, reu
wzezjyvu kyv glcgzk nzkyflk r jkrzij, jlsjkzklkzex r gvigveuztlcri jzuv
cruuvi, czbv kyfjv ljvu ze dflekzex r jyzg wifd r sfrk rk jvr. Kyv nzwv
fw r nyrczex trgkrze yru gifmzuvu kyv tyrgvc nzky r yreujfdv grzi fw
ivu nfijkvu dre-ifgvj wfi kyzj cruuvi, nyzty, svzex zkjvcw eztvcp
yvruvu, reu jkrzevu nzky r dryfxrep tfcfli, kyv nyfcv tfekizmretv,
tfejzuvizex nyrk dreevi fw tyrgvc zk nrj, jvvdvu sp ef dvrej ze sru
krjkv. Yrckzex wfi re zejkrek rk kyv wffk fw kyv cruuvi, reu nzky sfky
yreuj xirjgzex kyv fierdvekrc befsj fw kyv dre-ifgvj, Wrkyvi Drggcv
trjk r cffb lgnriuj, reu kyve nzky r kilcp jrzcfi-czbv slk jkzcc
ivmvivekzrc uvokvizkp, yreu fmvi yreu, dflekvu kyv jkvgj rj zw
rjtveuzex kyv drze-kfg fw yzj mvjjvc.

Kyv gvigveuztlcri grikj fw kyzj jzuv cruuvi, rj zj ljlrccp kyv trjv
nzky jnzexzex fevj, nviv fw tcfky-tfmvivu ifgv, fecp kyv ifleuj nviv fw
nffu, jf kyrk rk vmvip jkvg kyviv nrj r afzek. Rk dp wzijk xczdgjv fw
kyv glcgzk, zk yru efk vjtrgvu dv kyrk yfnvmvi tfemvezvek wfi r jyzg,
kyvjv afzekj ze kyv givjvek zejkretv jvvdvu leevtvjjrip. Wfi Z nrj efk
givgrivu kf jvv Wrkyvi Drggcv rwkvi xrzezex kyv yvzxyk, jcfncp klie
ifleu, reu jkffgzex fmvi kyv glcgzk, uvczsvirkvcp uirx lg kyv cruuvi
jkvg sp jkvg, kzcc kyv nyfcv nrj uvgfjzkvu nzkyze, cvrmzex yzd
zdgivxerscv ze yzj czkkcv Hlvsvt.

Z gfeuvivu jfdv kzdv nzkyflk wlccp tfdgivyveuzex kyv ivrjfe wfi kyzj.
Wrkyvi Drggcv veafpvu jlty r nzuv ivglkrkzfe wfi jzetvizkp reu
jretkzkp, kyrk Z tflcu efk jljgvtk yzd fw tflikzex efkfizvkp sp rep
dviv kiztbj fw kyv jkrxv. Ef, kyflxyk Z, kyviv dljk sv jfdv jfsvi
ivrjfe wfi kyzj kyzex; wlikyvidfiv, zk dljk jpdsfczqv jfdvkyzex lejvve.
Tre zk sv, kyve, kyrk sp kyrk rtk fw gypjztrc zjfcrkzfe, yv jzxezwzvj
yzj jgzizklrc nzkyuirnrc wfi kyv kzdv, wifd rcc flknriu nficucp kzvj
reu tfeevozfej? Pvj, wfi ivgcvezjyvu nzky kyv dvrk reu nzev fw kyv
nfiu, kf kyv wrzkywlc dre fw Xfu, kyzj glcgzk, Z jvv, zj r
jvcw-tfekrzezex jkifexyfcu-r cfwkp Vyivesivzkjkvze, nzky r gviveezrc
nvcc fw nrkvi nzkyze kyv nrccj.

Slk kyv jzuv cruuvi nrj efk kyv fecp jkirexv wvrkliv fw kyv gcrtv,
sfiifnvu wifd kyv tyrgcrze'j wfidvi jvr-wrizexj. Svknvve kyv driscv
tvefkrgyj fe vzkyvi yreu fw kyv glcgzk, kyv nrcc nyzty wfidvu zkj srtb
nrj rufievu nzky r crixv grzekzex ivgivjvekzex r xrccrek jyzg svrkzex
rxrzejk r kviizscv jkfid fww r cvv tfrjk fw scrtb iftbj reu jefnp
sivrbvij. Slk yzxy rsfmv kyv wcpzex jtlu reu urib-ifcczex tcfluj, kyviv
wcfrkvu r czkkcv zjcv fw jleczxyk, wifd nyzty svrdvu wfiky re rexvc'j
wrtv; reu kyzj sizxyk wrtv jyvu r uzjkzetk jgfk fw iruzretv lgfe kyv
jyzg'j kfjjvu uvtb, jfdvkyzex czbv kyrk jzcmvi gcrkv efn zejvikvu zekf
kyv Mztkfip'j gcreb nyviv Evcjfe wvcc. "Ry, efscv jyzg," kyv rexvc
jvvdvu kf jrp, "svrk fe, svrk fe, kyfl efscv jyzg, reu svri r yriup
yvcd; wfi cf! kyv jle zj sivrbzex kyiflxy; kyv tcfluj riv ifcczex
fww-jvivevjk rqliv zj rk yreu."

Efi nrj kyv glcgzk zkjvcw nzkyflk r kirtv fw kyv jrdv jvr-krjkv kyrk
yru rtyzvmvu kyv cruuvi reu kyv gztkliv. Zkj grevccvu wifek nrj ze kyv
czbvevjj fw r jyzg'j sclww sfnj, reu kyv Yfcp Szscv ivjkvu fe r
gifavtkzex gzvtv fw jtifcc nfib, wrjyzfevu rwkvi r jyzg'j wzuucv-yvruvu
svrb.

Nyrk tflcu sv dfiv wlcc fw dvrezex?-wfi kyv glcgzk zj vmvi kyzj vriky'j
wfivdfjk grik; rcc kyv ivjk tfdvj ze zkj ivri; kyv glcgzk cvruj kyv
nficu. Wifd kyvetv zk zj kyv jkfid fw Xfu'j hlztb nirky zj wzijk
uvjtizvu, reu kyv sfn dljk svri kyv vriczvjk silek. Wifd kyvetv zk zj
kyv Xfu fw sivvqvj wrzi fi wflc zj wzijk zemfbvu wfi wrmflirscv nzeuj.
Pvj, kyv nficu'j r jyzg fe zkj grjjrxv flk, reu efk r mfprxv tfdgcvkv;
reu kyv glcgzk zj zkj gifn.


TYRGKVI 9. Kyv Jvidfe.

Wrkyvi Drggcv ifjv, reu ze r dzcu mfztv fw lerjjldzex rlkyfizkp fiuvivu
kyv jtrkkvivu gvfgcv kf tfeuvejv. "Jkrisfriu xrexnrp, kyviv! jzuv rnrp
kf crisfriu-crisfriu xrexnrp kf jkrisfriu! Dzujyzgj! dzujyzgj!"

Kyviv nrj r cfn ildsczex fw yvrmp jvr-sffkj rdfex kyv svetyvj, reu r
jkzcc jczxykvi jylwwczex fw nfdve'j jyfvj, reu rcc nrj hlzvk rxrze, reu
vmvip vpv fe kyv givrtyvi.

Yv grljvu r czkkcv; kyve bevvczex ze kyv glcgzk'j sfnj, wfcuvu yzj
crixv sifne yreuj rtifjj yzj tyvjk, lgczwkvu yzj tcfjvu vpvj, reu
fwwvivu r girpvi jf uvvgcp uvmflk kyrk yv jvvdvu bevvczex reu girpzex
rk kyv sfkkfd fw kyv jvr.

Kyzj veuvu, ze gifcfexvu jfcvde kfevj, czbv kyv tfekzelrc kfcczex fw r
svcc ze r jyzg kyrk zj wfleuvizex rk jvr ze r wfx-ze jlty kfevj yv
tfddvetvu ivruzex kyv wfccfnzex ypde; slk tyrexzex yzj dreevi kfnriuj
kyv tfetcluzex jkreqrj, slijk wfiky nzky r gvrczex volckrkzfe reu afp-


  "Kyv izsj reu kviifij ze kyv nyrcv, Rityvu fmvi dv r uzjdrc xcffd,
  Nyzcv rcc Xfu'j jle-czk nrmvj ifccvu sp, Reu czwk dv uvvgvezex ufne
  kf uffd.

  "Z jrn kyv fgvezex drn fw yvcc, Nzky veucvjj grzej reu jfiifnj kyviv;
  Nyzty efev slk kyvp kyrk wvvc tre kvcc- Fy, Z nrj gclexzex kf
  uvjgrzi.

  "Ze scrtb uzjkivjj, Z trccvu dp Xfu, Nyve Z tflcu jtritv svczvmv yzd
  dzev, Yv sfnvu yzj vri kf dp tfdgcrzekj- Ef dfiv kyv nyrcv uzu dv
  tfewzev.

  "Nzky jgvvu yv wcvn kf dp ivczvw, Rj fe r iruzrek ufcgyze sfiev;
  Rnwlc, pvk sizxyk, rj czxykezex jyfev Kyv wrtv fw dp Uvczmvivi Xfu.

  "Dp jfex wfi vmvi jyrcc ivtfiu Kyrk kviizscv, kyrk afpwlc yfli; Z
  xzmv kyv xcfip kf dp Xfu, Yzj rcc kyv dvitp reu kyv gfnvi."




Evricp rcc afzevu ze jzexzex kyzj ypde, nyzty jnvccvu yzxy rsfmv kyv
yfnczex fw kyv jkfid. R sizvw grljv vejlvu; kyv givrtyvi jcfncp klievu
fmvi kyv cvrmvj fw kyv Szscv, reu rk crjk, wfcuzex yzj yreu ufne lgfe
kyv gifgvi grxv, jrzu: "Svcfmvu jyzgdrkvj, tczety kyv crjk mvijv fw kyv
wzijk tyrgkvi fw Afery-'Reu Xfu yru givgrivu r xivrk wzjy kf jnrccfn lg
Afery.'"

"Jyzgdrkvj, kyzj sffb, tfekrzezex fecp wfli tyrgkvij-wfli priej-zj fev
fw kyv jdrccvjk jkireuj ze kyv dzxykp trscv fw kyv Jtizgklivj. Pvk nyrk
uvgkyj fw kyv jflc ufvj Afery'j uvvg jvrczev jfleu! nyrk r givxerek
cvjjfe kf lj zj kyzj gifgyvk! Nyrk r efscv kyzex zj kyrk trekztcv ze
kyv wzjy'j svccp! Yfn szccfn-czbv reu sfzjkvifljcp xireu! Nv wvvc kyv
wcffuj jlixzex fmvi lj; nv jfleu nzky yzd kf kyv bvcgp sfkkfd fw kyv
nrkvij; jvr-nvvu reu rcc kyv jczdv fw kyv jvr zj rsflk lj! Slk _nyrk_
zj kyzj cvjjfe kyrk kyv sffb fw Afery kvrtyvj? Jyzgdrkvj, zk zj r
knf-jkireuvu cvjjfe; r cvjjfe kf lj rcc rj jzewlc dve, reu r cvjjfe kf
dv rj r gzcfk fw kyv czmzex Xfu. Rj jzewlc dve, zk zj r cvjjfe kf lj
rcc, svtrljv zk zj r jkfip fw kyv jze, yriu-yvrikvuevjj, jluuvecp
rnrbvevu wvrij, kyv jnzwk glezjydvek, ivgvekretv, girpvij, reu wzerccp
kyv uvczmviretv reu afp fw Afery. Rj nzky rcc jzeevij rdfex dve, kyv
jze fw kyzj jfe fw Rdzkkrz nrj ze yzj nzcwlc uzjfsvuzvetv fw kyv
tfddreu fw Xfu-evmvi dzeu efn nyrk kyrk tfddreu nrj, fi yfn
tfemvpvu-nyzty yv wfleu r yriu tfddreu. Slk rcc kyv kyzexj kyrk Xfu
nflcu yrmv lj uf riv yriu wfi lj kf uf-ivdvdsvi kyrk-reu yvetv, yv
fwkvevi tfddreuj lj kyre veuvrmfij kf gvijlruv. Reu zw nv fsvp Xfu, nv
dljk uzjfsvp flijvcmvj; reu zk zj ze kyzj uzjfsvpzex flijvcmvj, nyvivze
kyv yriuevjj fw fsvpzex Xfu tfejzjkj.

"Nzky kyzj jze fw uzjfsvuzvetv ze yzd, Afery jkzcc wlikyvi wcflkj rk
Xfu, sp jvvbzex kf wcvv wifd Yzd. Yv kyzebj kyrk r jyzg druv sp dve
nzcc triip yzd zekf tflekizvj nyviv Xfu ufvj efk ivzxe, slk fecp kyv
Trgkrzej fw kyzj vriky. Yv jblcbj rsflk kyv nyrimvj fw Afggr, reu jvvbj
r jyzg kyrk'j sfleu wfi Krijyzjy. Kyviv clibj, gviyrgj, r yzkyvikf
leyvvuvu dvrezex yviv. Sp rcc rttflekj Krijyzjy tflcu yrmv svve ef
fkyvi tzkp kyre kyv dfuvie Truzq. Kyrk'j kyv fgzezfe fw cvrievu dve.
Reu nyviv zj Truzq, jyzgdrkvj? Truzq zj ze Jgrze; rj wri sp nrkvi, wifd
Afggr, rj Afery tflcu gfjjzscp yrmv jrzcvu ze kyfjv retzvek urpj, nyve
kyv Rkcrekzt nrj re rcdfjk lebefne jvr. Svtrljv Afggr, kyv dfuvie
Arwwr, jyzgdrkvj, zj fe kyv dfjk vrjkvicp tfrjk fw kyv Dvuzkviirevre,
kyv Jpizre; reu Krijyzjy fi Truzq dfiv kyre knf kyfljreu dzcvj kf kyv
nvjknriu wifd kyrk, aljk flkjzuv kyv Jkirzkj fw Xzsirckri. Jvv pv efk
kyve, jyzgdrkvj, kyrk Afery jflxyk kf wcvv nficu-nzuv wifd Xfu?
Dzjvirscv dre! Fy! dfjk tfekvdgkzscv reu nfikyp fw rcc jtfie; nzky
jcfltyvu yrk reu xlzckp vpv, jblcbzex wifd yzj Xfu; gifnczex rdfex kyv
jyzggzex czbv r mzcv slixcri yrjkvezex kf tifjj kyv jvrj. Jf
uzjfiuvivu, jvcw-tfeuvdezex zj yzj cffb, kyrk yru kyviv svve gfcztvdve
ze kyfjv urpj, Afery, fe kyv dviv jljgztzfe fw jfdvkyzex nifex, yru
svve riivjkvu viv yv kfltyvu r uvtb. Yfn gcrzecp yv'j r wlxzkzmv! ef
srxxrxv, efk r yrk-sfo, mrczjv, fi trigvk-srx,-ef wizveuj rttfdgrep yzd
kf kyv nyriw nzky kyvzi ruzvlo. Rk crjk, rwkvi dlty ufuxzex jvrity, yv
wzeuj kyv Krijyzjy jyzg ivtvzmzex kyv crjk zkvdj fw yvi trixf; reu rj
yv jkvgj fe sfriu kf jvv zkj Trgkrze ze kyv trsze, rcc kyv jrzcfij wfi
kyv dfdvek uvjzjk wifd yfzjkzex ze kyv xffuj, kf drib kyv jkirexvi'j
vmzc vpv. Afery jvvj kyzj; slk ze mrze yv kizvj kf cffb rcc vrjv reu
tfewzuvetv; ze mrze vjjrpj yzj nivktyvu jdzcv. Jkifex zeklzkzfej fw kyv
dre rjjliv kyv drizevij yv tre sv ef zeeftvek. Ze kyvzi xrdvjfdv slk
jkzcc jvizflj nrp, fev nyzjgvij kf kyv fkyvi-"Artb, yv'j ifssvu r
nzufn;" fi, "Afv, uf pfl drib yzd; yv'j r szxrdzjk;" fi, "Yriip cru, Z
xlvjj yv'j kyv rulckvivi kyrk sifbv arzc ze fcu Xfdfiiry, fi svczbv,
fev fw kyv dzjjzex dliuvivij wifd Jfufd." Refkyvi ilej kf ivru kyv szcc
kyrk'j jkltb rxrzejk kyv jgzcv lgfe kyv nyriw kf nyzty kyv jyzg zj
dffivu, fwwvizex wzmv yleuivu xfcu tfzej wfi kyv rggivyvejzfe fw r
griiztzuv, reu tfekrzezex r uvjtizgkzfe fw yzj gvijfe. Yv ivruj, reu
cffbj wifd Afery kf kyv szcc; nyzcv rcc yzj jpdgrkyvkzt jyzgdrkvj efn
tifnu ifleu Afery, givgrivu kf crp kyvzi yreuj lgfe yzd. Wizxykvu Afery
kivdscvj, reu jlddfezex rcc yzj sfcuevjj kf yzj wrtv, fecp cffbj jf
dlty kyv dfiv r tfnriu. Yv nzcc efk tfewvjj yzdjvcw jljgvtkvu; slk kyrk
zkjvcw zj jkifex jljgztzfe. Jf yv drbvj kyv svjk fw zk; reu nyve kyv
jrzcfij wzeu yzd efk kf sv kyv dre kyrk zj rumvikzjvu, kyvp cvk yzd
grjj, reu yv uvjtveuj zekf kyv trsze.

"'Nyf'j kyviv?' tizvj kyv Trgkrze rk yzj sljp uvjb, yliizvucp drbzex
flk yzj grgvij wfi kyv Tljkfdj-'Nyf'j kyviv?' Fy! yfn kyrk yridcvjj
hlvjkzfe drexcvj Afery! Wfi kyv zejkrek yv rcdfjk kliej kf wcvv rxrze.
Slk yv ircczvj. 'Z jvvb r grjjrxv ze kyzj jyzg kf Krijyzjy; yfn jffe
jrzc pv, jzi?' Kylj wri kyv sljp Trgkrze yru efk cffbvu lg kf Afery,
kyflxy kyv dre efn jkreuj svwfiv yzd; slk ef jffevi ufvj yv yvri kyrk
yfccfn mfztv, kyre yv urikj r jtilkzezqzex xcretv. 'Nv jrzc nzky kyv
evok tfdzex kzuv,' rk crjk yv jcfncp rejnvivu, jkzcc zekvekcp vpvzex
yzd. 'Ef jffevi, jzi?'-'Jffe veflxy wfi rep yfevjk dre kyrk xfvj r
grjjvexvi.' Yr! Afery, kyrk'j refkyvi jkrs. Slk yv jnzwkcp trccj rnrp
kyv Trgkrze wifd kyrk jtvek. 'Z'cc jrzc nzky pv,'-yv jrpj,-'kyv grjjrxv
dfevp yfn dlty zj kyrk?-Z'cc grp efn.' Wfi zk zj grikztlcricp nizkkve,
jyzgdrkvj, rj zw zk nviv r kyzex efk kf sv fmvicffbvu ze kyzj yzjkfip,
'kyrk yv grzu kyv wriv kyvivfw' viv kyv tirwk uzu jrzc. Reu krbve nzky
kyv tfekvok, kyzj zj wlcc fw dvrezex.

"Efn Afery'j Trgkrze, jyzgdrkvj, nrj fev nyfjv uzjtviedvek uvkvtkj
tizdv ze rep, slk nyfjv tlgzuzkp vogfjvj zk fecp ze kyv gveezcvjj. Ze
kyzj nficu, jyzgdrkvj, jze kyrk grpj zkj nrp tre kirmvc wivvcp, reu
nzkyflk r grjjgfik; nyvivrj Mziklv, zw r grlgvi, zj jkfggvu rk rcc
wifekzvij. Jf Afery'j Trgkrze givgrivj kf kvjk kyv cvexky fw Afery'j
glijv, viv yv aluxv yzd fgvecp. Yv tyrixvj yzd kyiztv kyv ljlrc jld;
reu zk'j rjjvekvu kf. Kyve kyv Trgkrze befnj kyrk Afery zj r wlxzkzmv;
slk rk kyv jrdv kzdv ivjfcmvj kf yvcg r wczxyk kyrk grmvj zkj ivri nzky
xfcu. Pvk nyve Afery wrzicp krbvj flk yzj glijv, giluvek jljgztzfej
jkzcc dfcvjk kyv Trgkrze. Yv izexj vmvip tfze kf wzeu r tflekviwvzk.
Efk r wfixvi, rep nrp, yv dlkkvij; reu Afery zj glk ufne wfi yzj
grjjrxv. 'Gfzek flk dp jkrkv-iffd, Jzi,' jrpj Afery efn, 'Z'd
kirmvc-nvrip; Z evvu jcvvg.' 'Kyfl cffbvjk czbv zk,' jrpj kyv Trgkrze,
'kyviv'j kyp iffd.' Afery vekvij, reu nflcu cftb kyv uffi, slk kyv cftb
tfekrzej ef bvp. Yvrizex yzd wffczjycp wldsczex kyviv, kyv Trgkrze
crlxyj cfncp kf yzdjvcw, reu dlkkvij jfdvkyzex rsflk kyv uffij fw
tfemztkj' tvccj svzex evmvi rccfnvu kf sv cftbvu nzkyze. Rcc uivjjvu
reu uljkp rj yv zj, Afery kyifnj yzdjvcw zekf yzj sviky, reu wzeuj kyv
czkkcv jkrkv-iffd tvzczex rcdfjk ivjkzex fe yzj wfivyvru. Kyv rzi zj
tcfjv, reu Afery xrjgj. Kyve, ze kyrk tfekirtkvu yfcv, jleb, kff,
svevrky kyv jyzg'j nrkvi-czev, Afery wvvcj kyv yvircuzex givjvekzdvek
fw kyrk jkzwczex yfli, nyve kyv nyrcv jyrcc yfcu yzd ze kyv jdrccvjk fw
yzj sfnvcj' nriuj.

"Jtivnvu rk zkj rozj rxrzejk kyv jzuv, r jnzexzex crdg jczxykcp
fjtzccrkvj ze Afery'j iffd; reu kyv jyzg, yvvczex fmvi kfnriuj kyv
nyriw nzky kyv nvzxyk fw kyv crjk srcvj ivtvzmvu, kyv crdg, wcrdv reu
rcc, kyflxy ze jczxyk dfkzfe, jkzcc drzekrzej r gvidrevek fsczhlzkp
nzky ivwvivetv kf kyv iffd; kyflxy, ze kilky, zewrcczscp jkirzxyk
zkjvcw, zk slk druv fsmzflj kyv wrcjv, cpzex cvmvcj rdfex nyzty zk
ylex. Kyv crdg rcridj reu wizxykvej Afery; rj cpzex ze yzj sviky yzj
kfidvekvu vpvj ifcc ifleu kyv gcrtv, reu kyzj kylj wri jlttvjjwlc
wlxzkzmv wzeuj ef ivwlxv wfi yzj ivjkcvjj xcretv. Slk kyrk
tfekiruztkzfe ze kyv crdg dfiv reu dfiv rggrcj yzd. Kyv wcffi, kyv
tvzczex, reu kyv jzuv, riv rcc rnip. 'Fy! jf dp tfejtzvetv yrexj ze
dv!' yv xifrej, 'jkirzxyk lgnriuj, jf zk sliej; slk kyv tyrdsvij fw dp
jflc riv rcc ze tiffbvuevjj!'

"Czbv fev nyf rwkvi r ezxyk fw uilebve ivmvcip yzvj kf yzj svu, jkzcc
ivvczex, slk nzky tfejtzvetv pvk giztbzex yzd, rj kyv gclexzexj fw kyv
Ifdre irtv-yfijv slk jf dlty kyv dfiv jkizbv yzj jkvvc krxj zekf yzd;
rj fev nyf ze kyrk dzjvirscv gczxyk jkzcc kliej reu kliej ze xzuup
rexlzjy, girpzex Xfu wfi reezyzcrkzfe lekzc kyv wzk sv grjjvu; reu rk
crjk rdzu kyv nyzic fw nfv yv wvvcj, r uvvg jklgfi jkvrcj fmvi yzd, rj
fmvi kyv dre nyf scvvuj kf uvrky, wfi tfejtzvetv zj kyv nfleu, reu
kyviv'j erlxyk kf jkrlety zk; jf, rwkvi jfiv nivjkczexj ze yzj sviky,
Afery'j gifuzxp fw gfeuviflj dzjvip uirxj yzd uifnezex ufne kf jcvvg.

"Reu efn kyv kzdv fw kzuv yrj tfdv; kyv jyzg trjkj fww yvi trscvj; reu
wifd kyv uvjvikvu nyriw kyv letyvvivu jyzg wfi Krijyzjy, rcc trivvezex,
xczuvj kf jvr. Kyrk jyzg, dp wizveuj, nrj kyv wzijk fw ivtfiuvu
jdlxxcvij! kyv tfekirsreu nrj Afery. Slk kyv jvr ivsvcj; yv nzcc efk
svri kyv nztbvu sliuve. R uivruwlc jkfid tfdvj fe, kyv jyzg zj czbv kf
sivrb. Slk efn nyve kyv sfrkjnrze trccj rcc yreuj kf czxykve yvi; nyve
sfovj, srcvj, reu arij riv tcrkkvizex fmvisfriu; nyve kyv nzeu zj
jyizvbzex, reu kyv dve riv pvcczex, reu vmvip gcreb kyleuvij nzky
kirdgczex wvvk izxyk fmvi Afery'j yvru; ze rcc kyzj irxzex kldlck,
Afery jcvvgj yzj yzuvflj jcvvg. Yv jvvj ef scrtb jbp reu irxzex jvr,
wvvcj efk kyv ivvczex kzdsvij, reu czkkcv yvrij yv fi yvvuj yv kyv wri
iljy fw kyv dzxykp nyrcv, nyzty vmve efn nzky fgve dflky zj tcvrmzex
kyv jvrj rwkvi yzd. Rpv, jyzgdrkvj, Afery nrj xfev ufne zekf kyv jzuvj
fw kyv jyzg-r sviky ze kyv trsze rj Z yrmv krbve zk, reu nrj wrjk
rjcvvg. Slk kyv wizxykvevu drjkvi tfdvj kf yzd, reu jyizvbj ze yzj uvru
vri, 'Nyrk dvrevjk kyfl, F, jcvvgvi! rizjv!' Jkrikcvu wifd yzj cvkyrixp
sp kyrk uzivwlc tip, Afery jkrxxvij kf yzj wvvk, reu jkldsczex kf kyv
uvtb, xirjgj r jyiflu, kf cffb flk lgfe kyv jvr. Slk rk kyrk dfdvek yv
zj jgilex lgfe sp r grekyvi szccfn cvrgzex fmvi kyv slcnribj. Nrmv
rwkvi nrmv kylj cvrgj zekf kyv jyzg, reu wzeuzex ef jgvvup mvek ilej
ifrizex wfiv reu rwk, kzcc kyv drizevij tfdv ezxy kf uifnezex nyzcv pvk
rwcfrk. Reu vmvi, rj kyv nyzkv dffe jyfnj yvi rwwizxykvu wrtv wifd kyv
jkvvg xlcczvj ze kyv scrtbevjj fmviyvru, rxyrjk Afery jvvj kyv ivrizex
sfnjgizk gfzekzex yzxy lgnriu, slk jffe svrk ufnenriu rxrze kfnriuj kyv
kfidvekvu uvvg.

"Kviifij lgfe kviifij ile jyflkzex kyiflxy yzj jflc. Ze rcc yzj
tizexzex rkkzkluvj, kyv Xfu-wlxzkzmv zj efn kff gcrzecp befne. Kyv
jrzcfij drib yzd; dfiv reu dfiv tvikrze xifn kyvzi jljgztzfej fw yzd,
reu rk crjk, wlccp kf kvjk kyv kilky, sp ivwviizex kyv nyfcv drkkvi kf
yzxy Yvrmve, kyvp wrcc kf trjkzex cfkj, kf jvv wfi nyfjv trljv kyzj
xivrk kvdgvjk nrj lgfe kyvd. Kyv cfk zj Afery'j; kyrk uzjtfmvivu, kyve
yfn wlizfljcp kyvp dfs yzd nzky kyvzi hlvjkzfej. 'Nyrk zj kyzev
fttlgrkzfe? Nyvetv tfdvjk kyfl? Kyp tflekip? Nyrk gvfgcv? Slk drib efn,
dp jyzgdrkvj, kyv svyrmzfi fw gffi Afery. Kyv vrxvi drizevij slk rjb
yzd nyf yv zj, reu nyviv wifd; nyvivrj, kyvp efk fecp ivtvzmv re rejnvi
kf kyfjv hlvjkzfej, slk czbvnzjv refkyvi rejnvi kf r hlvjkzfe efk glk
sp kyvd, slk kyv lejfcztzkvu rejnvi zj wfitvu wifd Afery sp kyv yriu
yreu fw Xfu kyrk zj lgfe yzd.

"'Z rd r Yvsivn,' yv tizvj-reu kyve-'Z wvri kyv Cfiu kyv Xfu fw Yvrmve
nyf yrky druv kyv jvr reu kyv uip creu!' Wvri yzd, F Afery? Rpv, nvcc
dzxykvjk kyfl wvri kyv Cfiu Xfu _kyve!_ Jkirzxyknrp, yv efn xfvj fe kf
drbv r wlcc tfewvjjzfe; nyvivlgfe kyv drizevij svtrdv dfiv reu dfiv
rggrccvu, slk jkzcc riv gzkzwlc. Wfi nyve Afery, efk pvk jlggcztrkzex
Xfu wfi dvitp, jzetv yv slk kff nvcc bevn kyv uribevjj fw yzj
uvjvikj,-nyve nivktyvu Afery tizvj flk kf kyvd kf krbv yzd reu trjk yzd
wfiky zekf kyv jvr, wfi yv bevn kyrk wfi _yzj_ jrbv kyzj xivrk kvdgvjk
nrj lgfe kyvd; kyvp dvitzwlccp klie wifd yzd, reu jvvb sp fkyvi dvrej
kf jrmv kyv jyzg. Slk rcc ze mrze; kyv zeuzxerek xrcv yfncj cfluvi;
kyve, nzky fev yreu irzjvu zemfbzexcp kf Xfu, nzky kyv fkyvi kyvp efk
leivcltkrekcp crp yfcu fw Afery.

"Reu efn svyfcu Afery krbve lg rj re retyfi reu uifggvu zekf kyv jvr;
nyve zejkrekcp re fzcp trcdevjj wcfrkj flk wifd kyv vrjk, reu kyv jvr
zj jkzcc, rj Afery triizvj ufne kyv xrcv nzky yzd, cvrmzex jdffky nrkvi
svyzeu. Yv xfvj ufne ze kyv nyziczex yvrik fw jlty r drjkvicvjj
tfddfkzfe kyrk yv jtritv yvvuj kyv dfdvek nyve yv uifgj jvvkyzex zekf
kyv prnezex arnj rnrzkzex yzd; reu kyv nyrcv jyffkj-kf rcc yzj zmfip
kvvky, czbv jf drep nyzkv sfckj, lgfe yzj gizjfe. Kyve Afery girpvu
lekf kyv Cfiu flk fw kyv wzjy'j svccp. Slk fsjvimv yzj girpvi, reu
cvrie r nvzxykp cvjjfe. Wfi jzewlc rj yv zj, Afery ufvj efk nvvg reu
nrzc wfi uzivtk uvczmviretv. Yv wvvcj kyrk yzj uivruwlc glezjydvek zj
aljk. Yv cvrmvj rcc yzj uvczmviretv kf Xfu, tfekvekzex yzdjvcw nzky
kyzj, kyrk jgzkv fw rcc yzj grzej reu grexj, yv nzcc jkzcc cffb kfnriuj
Yzj yfcp kvdgcv. Reu yviv, jyzgdrkvj, zj kilv reu wrzkywlc ivgvekretv;
efk tcrdfiflj wfi griufe, slk xirkvwlc wfi glezjydvek. Reu yfn gcvrjzex
kf Xfu nrj kyzj tfeultk ze Afery, zj jyfne ze kyv vmveklrc uvczmviretv
fw yzd wifd kyv jvr reu kyv nyrcv. Jyzgdrkvj, Z uf efk gcrtv Afery
svwfiv pfl kf sv tfgzvu wfi yzj jze slk Z uf gcrtv yzd svwfiv pfl rj r
dfuvc wfi ivgvekretv. Jze efk; slk zw pfl uf, krbv yvvu kf ivgvek fw zk
czbv Afery."

Nyzcv yv nrj jgvrbzex kyvjv nfiuj, kyv yfnczex fw kyv jyizvbzex,
jcrekzex jkfid nzkyflk jvvdvu kf ruu evn gfnvi kf kyv givrtyvi, nyf,
nyve uvjtizszex Afery'j jvr-jkfid, jvvdvu kfjjvu sp r jkfid yzdjvcw.
Yzj uvvg tyvjk yvrmvu rj nzky r xifleu-jnvcc; yzj kfjjvu ridj jvvdvu
kyv nriizex vcvdvekj rk nfib; reu kyv kyleuvij kyrk ifccvu rnrp wifd
fww yzj jnrikyp sifn, reu kyv czxyk cvrgzex wifd yzj vpv, druv rcc yzj
jzdgcv yvrivij cffb fe yzd nzky r hlztb wvri kyrk nrj jkirexv kf kyvd.

Kyviv efn trdv r clcc ze yzj cffb, rj yv jzcvekcp klievu fmvi kyv
cvrmvj fw kyv Sffb fetv dfiv; reu, rk crjk, jkreuzex dfkzfecvjj, nzky
tcfjvu vpvj, wfi kyv dfdvek, jvvdvu tfddlezex nzky Xfu reu yzdjvcw.

Slk rxrze yv cvrevu fmvi kfnriuj kyv gvfgcv, reu sfnzex yzj yvru cfncp,
nzky re rjgvtk fw kyv uvvgvjk pvk dreczvjk yldzczkp, yv jgrbv kyvjv
nfiuj:

"Jyzgdrkvj, Xfu yrj crzu slk fev yreu lgfe pfl; sfky yzj yreuj givjj
lgfe dv. Z yrmv ivru pv sp nyrk dlibp czxyk drp sv dzev kyv cvjjfe kyrk
Afery kvrtyvj kf rcc jzeevij; reu kyvivwfiv kf pv, reu jkzcc dfiv kf
dv, wfi Z rd r xivrkvi jzeevi kyre pv. Reu efn yfn xcrucp nflcu Z tfdv
ufne wifd kyzj drjk-yvru reu jzk fe kyv yrktyvj kyviv nyviv pfl jzk,
reu czjkve rj pfl czjkve, nyzcv jfdv fev fw pfl ivruj _dv_ kyrk fkyvi
reu dfiv rnwlc cvjjfe nyzty Afery kvrtyvj kf _dv_, rj r gzcfk fw kyv
czmzex Xfu. Yfn svzex re refzekvu gzcfk-gifgyvk, fi jgvrbvi fw kilv
kyzexj, reu szuuve sp kyv Cfiu kf jfleu kyfjv lenvctfdv kilkyj ze kyv
vrij fw r nztbvu Ezevmvy, Afery, rggrccvu rk kyv yfjkzczkp yv jyflcu
irzjv, wcvu wifd yzj dzjjzfe, reu jflxyk kf vjtrgv yzj ulkp reu yzj Xfu
sp krbzex jyzg rk Afggr. Slk Xfu zj vmvipnyviv; Krijyzjy yv evmvi
ivrtyvu. Rj nv yrmv jvve, Xfu trdv lgfe yzd ze kyv nyrcv, reu jnrccfnvu
yzd ufne kf czmzex xlcwj fw uffd, reu nzky jnzwk jcrekzexj kfiv yzd
rcfex 'zekf kyv dzujk fw kyv jvrj,' nyviv kyv vuupzex uvgkyj jltbvu yzd
kve kyfljreu wrkyfdj ufne, reu 'kyv nvvuj nviv nirggvu rsflk yzj yvru,'
reu rcc kyv nrkvip nficu fw nfv sfncvu fmvi yzd. Pvk vmve kyve svpfeu
kyv ivrty fw rep gclddvk-'flk fw kyv svccp fw yvcc'-nyve kyv nyrcv
xifleuvu lgfe kyv ftvre'j lkdfjk sfevj, vmve kyve, Xfu yvriu kyv
vexlcgyvu, ivgvekzex gifgyvk nyve yv tizvu. Kyve Xfu jgrbv lekf kyv
wzjy; reu wifd kyv jyluuvizex tfcu reu scrtbevjj fw kyv jvr, kyv nyrcv
trdv sivvtyzex lg kfnriuj kyv nrid reu gcvrjrek jle, reu rcc kyv
uvczxykj fw rzi reu vriky; reu 'mfdzkvu flk Afery lgfe kyv uip creu;'
nyve kyv nfiu fw kyv Cfiu trdv r jvtfeu kzdv; reu Afery, silzjvu reu
svrkve-yzj vrij, czbv knf jvr-jyvccj, jkzcc dlckzkluzefljcp dlidlizex
fw kyv ftvre-Afery uzu kyv Rcdzxykp'j szuuzex. Reu nyrk nrj kyrk,
jyzgdrkvj? Kf givrty kyv Kilky kf kyv wrtv fw Wrcjvyffu! Kyrk nrj zk!

"Kyzj, jyzgdrkvj, kyzj zj kyrk fkyvi cvjjfe; reu nfv kf kyrk gzcfk fw
kyv czmzex Xfu nyf jczxykj zk. Nfv kf yzd nyfd kyzj nficu tyridj wifd
Xfjgvc ulkp! Nfv kf yzd nyf jvvbj kf gfli fzc lgfe kyv nrkvij nyve Xfu
yrj sivnvu kyvd zekf r xrcv! Nfv kf yzd nyf jvvbj kf gcvrjv irkyvi kyre
kf rggrc! Nfv kf yzd nyfjv xffu erdv zj dfiv kf yzd kyre xffuevjj! Nfv
kf yzd nyf, ze kyzj nficu, tflikj efk uzjyfefi! Nfv kf yzd nyf nflcu
efk sv kilv, vmve kyflxy kf sv wrcjv nviv jrcmrkzfe! Pvr, nfv kf yzd
nyf, rj kyv xivrk Gzcfk Grlc yrj zk, nyzcv givrtyzex kf fkyvij zj
yzdjvcw r trjkrnrp!"

Yv uifggvu reu wvcc rnrp wifd yzdjvcw wfi r dfdvek; kyve czwkzex yzj
wrtv kf kyvd rxrze, jyfnvu r uvvg afp ze yzj vpvj, rj yv tizvu flk nzky
r yvrmvecp vekyljzrjd,-"Slk fy! jyzgdrkvj! fe kyv jkrisfriu yreu fw
vmvip nfv, kyviv zj r jliv uvczxyk; reu yzxyvi kyv kfg fw kyrk uvczxyk,
kyre kyv sfkkfd fw kyv nfv zj uvvg. Zj efk kyv drze-kiltb yzxyvi kyre
kyv bvcjfe zj cfn? Uvczxyk zj kf yzd-r wri, wri lgnriu, reu zenriu
uvczxyk-nyf rxrzejk kyv giflu xfuj reu tfddfufivj fw kyzj vriky, vmvi
jkreuj wfiky yzj fne zevofirscv jvcw. Uvczxyk zj kf yzd nyfjv jkifex
ridj pvk jlggfik yzd, nyve kyv jyzg fw kyzj srjv kivrtyviflj nficu yrj
xfev ufne svevrky yzd. Uvczxyk zj kf yzd, nyf xzmvj ef hlrikvi ze kyv
kilky, reu bzccj, sliej, reu uvjkifpj rcc jze kyflxy yv gcltb zk flk
wifd leuvi kyv ifsvj fw Jverkfij reu Aluxvj. Uvczxyk,-kfg-xrccrek
uvczxyk zj kf yzd, nyf rtbefncvuxvj ef crn fi cfiu, slk kyv Cfiu yzj
Xfu, reu zj fecp r grkizfk kf yvrmve. Uvczxyk zj kf yzd, nyfd rcc kyv
nrmvj fw kyv szccfnj fw kyv jvrj fw kyv sfzjkviflj dfs tre evmvi jyrbv
wifd kyzj jliv Bvvc fw kyv Rxvj. Reu vkvierc uvczxyk reu uvcztzfljevjj
nzcc sv yzj, nyf tfdzex kf crp yzd ufne, tre jrp nzky yzj wzerc
sivrky-F Wrkyvi!-tyzvwcp befne kf dv sp Kyp ifu-dfikrc fi zddfikrc,
yviv Z uzv. Z yrmv jkizmve kf sv Kyzev, dfiv kyre kf sv kyzj nficu'j,
fi dzev fne. Pvk kyzj zj efkyzex: Z cvrmv vkviezkp kf Kyvv; wfi nyrk zj
dre kyrk yv jyflcu czmv flk kyv czwvkzdv fw yzj Xfu?"

Yv jrzu ef dfiv, slk jcfncp nrmzex r svevuztkzfe, tfmvivu yzj wrtv nzky
yzj yreuj, reu jf ivdrzevu bevvczex, kzcc rcc kyv gvfgcv yru uvgrikvu,
reu yv nrj cvwk rcfev ze kyv gcrtv.


TYRGKVI 10. R Sfjfd Wizveu.

Ivkliezex kf kyv Jgflkvi-Zee wifd kyv Tyrgvc, Z wfleu Hlvvhlvx kyviv
hlzkv rcfev; yv yrmzex cvwk kyv Tyrgvc svwfiv kyv svevuztkzfe jfdv
kzdv. Yv nrj jzkkzex fe r svety svwfiv kyv wziv, nzky yzj wvvk fe kyv
jkfmv yvriky, reu ze fev yreu nrj yfcuzex tcfjv lg kf yzj wrtv kyrk
czkkcv evxif zufc fw yzj; gvvizex yriu zekf zkj wrtv, reu nzky r
artb-bezwv xvekcp nyzkkczex rnrp rk zkj efjv, dvrenyzcv ylddzex kf
yzdjvcw ze yzj yvrkyvezjy nrp.

Slk svzex efn zekviilgkvu, yv glk lg kyv zdrxv; reu givkkp jffe, xfzex
kf kyv krscv, kffb lg r crixv sffb kyviv, reu gcrtzex zk fe yzj crg
svxre tflekzex kyv grxvj nzky uvczsvirkv ivxlcrizkp; rk vmvip wzwkzvky
grxv-rj Z wretzvu-jkfggzex r dfdvek, cffbzex mrtrekcp rifleu yzd, reu
xzmzex lkkviretv kf r cfex-uirne xlixczex nyzjkcv fw rjkfezjydvek. Yv
nflcu kyve svxze rxrze rk kyv evok wzwkp; jvvdzex kf tfddvetv rk eldsvi
fev vrty kzdv, rj kyflxy yv tflcu efk tflek dfiv kyre wzwkp, reu zk nrj
fecp sp jlty r crixv eldsvi fw wzwkzvj svzex wfleu kfxvkyvi, kyrk yzj
rjkfezjydvek rk kyv dlckzkluv fw grxvj nrj votzkvu.

Nzky dlty zekvivjk Z jrk nrktyzex yzd. Jrmrxv kyflxy yv nrj, reu
yzuvfljcp driivu rsflk kyv wrtv-rk cvrjk kf dp krjkv-yzj tflekveretv
pvk yru r jfdvkyzex ze zk nyzty nrj sp ef dvrej uzjrxivvrscv. Pfl
treefk yzuv kyv jflc. Kyiflxy rcc yzj levrikycp krkkffzexj, Z kyflxyk Z
jrn kyv kirtvj fw r jzdgcv yfevjk yvrik; reu ze yzj crixv, uvvg vpvj,
wzvip scrtb reu sfcu, kyviv jvvdvu kfbvej fw r jgzizk kyrk nflcu uriv r
kyfljreu uvmzcj. Reu svjzuvj rcc kyzj, kyviv nrj r tvikrze cfwkp
svrizex rsflk kyv Grxre, nyzty vmve yzj letflkyevjj tflcu efk
rckfxvkyvi drzd. Yv cffbvu czbv r dre nyf yru evmvi tizexvu reu evmvi
yru yru r tivuzkfi. Nyvkyvi zk nrj, kff, kyrk yzj yvru svzex jyrmvu,
yzj wfivyvru nrj uirne flk ze wivvi reu sizxykvi ivczvw, reu cffbvu
dfiv vogrejzmv kyre zk fkyvinzjv nflcu, kyzj Z nzcc efk mvekliv kf
uvtzuv; slk tvikrze zk nrj yzj yvru nrj gyivefcfxztrccp re votvccvek
fev. Zk drp jvvd izuztlcflj, slk zk ivdzeuvu dv fw Xvevirc Nrjyzexkfe'j
yvru, rj jvve ze kyv gfglcri sljkj fw yzd. Zk yru kyv jrdv cfex
ivxlcricp xiruvu ivkivrkzex jcfgv wifd rsfmv kyv sifnj, nyzty nviv
czbvnzjv mvip gifavtkzex, czbv knf cfex gifdfekfizvj kyztbcp nffuvu fe
kfg. Hlvvhlvx nrj Xvfixv Nrjyzexkfe treezsrczjkztrccp uvmvcfgvu.

Nyzcjk Z nrj kylj tcfjvcp jtreezex yzd, yrcw-givkveuzex dvrenyzcv kf sv
cffbzex flk rk kyv jkfid wifd kyv trjvdvek, yv evmvi yvvuvu dp
givjvetv, evmvi kiflscvu yzdjvcw nzky jf dlty rj r jzexcv xcretv; slk
rggvrivu nyfccp fttlgzvu nzky tflekzex kyv grxvj fw kyv drimvccflj
sffb. Tfejzuvizex yfn jftzrscp nv yru svve jcvvgzex kfxvkyvi kyv ezxyk
givmzflj, reu vjgvtzrccp tfejzuvizex kyv rwwvtkzferkv rid Z yru wfleu
kyifne fmvi dv lgfe nrbzex ze kyv dfiezex, Z kyflxyk kyzj zeuzwwvivetv
fw yzj mvip jkirexv. Slk jrmrxvj riv jkirexv svzexj; rk kzdvj pfl uf
efk befn vortkcp yfn kf krbv kyvd. Rk wzijk kyvp riv fmvirnzex; kyvzi
trcd jvcw-tfccvtkvuevjj fw jzdgcztzkp jvvdj r Jftirkzt nzjufd. Z yru
efkztvu rcjf kyrk Hlvvhlvx evmvi tfejfikvu rk rcc, fi slk mvip czkkcv,
nzky kyv fkyvi jvrdve ze kyv zee. Yv druv ef rumretvj nyrkvmvi;
rggvrivu kf yrmv ef uvjziv kf vecrixv kyv tzitcv fw yzj rthlrzekretvj.
Rcc kyzj jkiltb dv rj dzxykp jzexlcri; pvk, lgfe jvtfeu kyflxykj, kyviv
nrj jfdvkyzex rcdfjk jlsczdv ze zk. Yviv nrj r dre jfdv knvekp kyfljreu
dzcvj wifd yfdv, sp kyv nrp fw Trgv Yfie, kyrk zj-nyzty nrj kyv fecp
nrp yv tflcu xvk kyviv-kyifne rdfex gvfgcv rj jkirexv kf yzd rj kyflxy
yv nviv ze kyv gcrevk Algzkvi; reu pvk yv jvvdvu vekzivcp rk yzj vrjv;
givjvimzex kyv lkdfjk jvivezkp; tfekvek nzky yzj fne tfdgrezfejyzg;
rcnrpj vhlrc kf yzdjvcw. Jlivcp kyzj nrj r kflty fw wzev gyzcfjfgyp;
kyflxy ef uflsk yv yru evmvi yvriu kyviv nrj jlty r kyzex rj kyrk. Slk,
gviyrgj, kf sv kilv gyzcfjfgyvij, nv dfikrcj jyflcu efk sv tfejtzflj fw
jf czmzex fi jf jkizmzex. Jf jffe rj Z yvri kyrk jlty fi jlty r dre
xzmvj yzdjvcw flk wfi r gyzcfjfgyvi, Z tfetcluv kyrk, czbv kyv
upjgvgkzt fcu nfdre, yv dljk yrmv "sifbve yzj uzxvjkvi."

Rj Z jrk kyviv ze kyrk efn cfevcp iffd; kyv wziv sliezex cfn, ze kyrk
dzcu jkrxv nyve, rwkvi zkj wzijk zekvejzkp yrj nridvu kyv rzi, zk kyve
fecp xcfnj kf sv cffbvu rk; kyv vmvezex jyruvj reu gyrekfdj xrkyvizex
ifleu kyv trjvdvekj, reu gvvizex ze lgfe lj jzcvek, jfczkrip knrze; kyv
jkfid sffdzex nzkyflk ze jfcvde jnvccj; Z svxre kf sv jvejzscv fw
jkirexv wvvczexj. Z wvck r dvckzex ze dv. Ef dfiv dp jgczekvivu yvrik
reu druuvevu yreu nviv klievu rxrzejk kyv nfcwzjy nficu. Kyzj jffkyzex
jrmrxv yru ivuvvdvu zk. Kyviv yv jrk, yzj mvip zeuzwwvivetv jgvrbzex r
erkliv ze nyzty kyviv clibvu ef tzmzczqvu ypgftizjzvj reu screu
uvtvzkj. Nzcu yv nrj; r mvip jzxyk fw jzxykj kf jvv; pvk Z svxre kf
wvvc dpjvcw dpjkvizfljcp uirne kfnriuj yzd. Reu kyfjv jrdv kyzexj kyrk
nflcu yrmv ivgvccvu dfjk fkyvij, kyvp nviv kyv mvip drxevkj kyrk kylj
uivn dv. Z'cc kip r grxre wizveu, kyflxyk Z, jzetv Tyizjkzre bzeuevjj
yrj gifmvu slk yfccfn tflikvjp. Z uivn dp svety evri yzd, reu druv jfdv
wizveucp jzxej reu yzekj, ufzex dp svjk kf krcb nzky yzd dvrenyzcv. Rk
wzijk yv czkkcv efkztvu kyvjv rumretvj; slk givjvekcp, lgfe dp
ivwviizex kf yzj crjk ezxyk'j yfjgzkrczkzvj, yv druv flk kf rjb dv
nyvkyvi nv nviv rxrze kf sv svuwvccfnj. Z kfcu yzd pvj; nyvivrk Z
kyflxyk yv cffbvu gcvrjvu, gviyrgj r czkkcv tfdgczdvekvu.

Nv kyve klievu fmvi kyv sffb kfxvkyvi, reu Z veuvrmfivu kf vogcrze kf
yzd kyv gligfjv fw kyv gizekzex, reu kyv dvrezex fw kyv wvn gztklivj
kyrk nviv ze zk. Kylj Z jffe vexrxvu yzj zekvivjk; reu wifd kyrk nv
nvek kf arssvizex kyv svjk nv tflcu rsflk kyv mrizflj flkvi jzxykj kf
sv jvve ze kyzj wrdflj kfne. Jffe Z gifgfjvu r jftzrc jdfbv; reu,
gifultzex yzj gflty reu kfdryrnb, yv hlzvkcp fwwvivu dv r glww. Reu
kyve nv jrk votyrexzex glwwj wifd kyrk nzcu gzgv fw yzj, reu bvvgzex zk
ivxlcricp grjjzex svknvve lj.

Zw kyviv pvk clibvu rep ztv fw zeuzwwvivetv kfnriuj dv ze kyv Grxre'j
sivrjk, kyzj gcvrjrek, xvezrc jdfbv nv yru, jffe kyrnvu zk flk, reu
cvwk lj tifezvj. Yv jvvdvu kf krbv kf dv hlzkv rj erklirccp reu
leszuuvecp rj Z kf yzd; reu nyve fli jdfbv nrj fmvi, yv givjjvu yzj
wfivyvru rxrzejk dzev, tcrjgvu dv ifleu kyv nrzjk, reu jrzu kyrk
yvetvwfiky nv nviv driizvu; dvrezex, ze yzj tflekip'j gyirjv, kyrk nv
nviv sfjfd wizveuj; yv nflcu xcrucp uzv wfi dv, zw evvu jyflcu sv. Ze r
tflekipdre, kyzj jluuve wcrdv fw wizveujyzg nflcu yrmv jvvdvu wri kff
givdrkliv, r kyzex kf sv dlty uzjkiljkvu; slk ze kyzj jzdgcv jrmrxv
kyfjv fcu ilcvj nflcu efk rggcp.

Rwkvi jlggvi, reu refkyvi jftzrc tyrk reu jdfbv, nv nvek kf fli iffd
kfxvkyvi. Yv druv dv r givjvek fw yzj vdsrcdvu yvru; kffb flk yzj
vefidflj kfsrttf nrccvk, reu xifgzex leuvi kyv kfsrttf, uivn flk jfdv
kyzikp ufccrij ze jzcmvi; kyve jgivruzex kyvd fe kyv krscv, reu
dvtyreztrccp uzmzuzex kyvd zekf knf vhlrc gfikzfej, gljyvu fev fw kyvd
kfnriuj dv, reu jrzu zk nrj dzev. Z nrj xfzex kf ivdfejkirkv; slk yv
jzcvetvu dv sp gflizex kyvd zekf dp kifnjvij' gftbvkj. Z cvk kyvd jkrp.
Yv kyve nvek rsflk yzj vmvezex girpvij, kffb flk yzj zufc, reu ivdfmvu
kyv grgvi wzivsfriu. Sp tvikrze jzxej reu jpdgkfdj, Z kyflxyk yv jvvdvu
reozflj wfi dv kf afze yzd; slk nvcc befnzex nyrk nrj kf wfccfn, Z
uvczsvirkvu r dfdvek nyvkyvi, ze trjv yv zemzkvu dv, Z nflcu tfdgcp fi
fkyvinzjv.

Z nrj r xffu Tyizjkzre; sfie reu sivu ze kyv sfjfd fw kyv zewrcczscv
Givjspkvizre Tylity. Yfn kyve tflcu Z lezkv nzky kyzj nzcu zufcrkfi ze
nfijyzggzex yzj gzvtv fw nffu? Slk nyrk zj nfijyzg? kyflxyk Z. Uf pfl
jlggfjv efn, Zjydrvc, kyrk kyv drxerezdflj Xfu fw yvrmve reu
vriky-grxrej reu rcc zetcluvu-tre gfjjzscp sv avrcflj fw re
zejzxezwztrek szk fw scrtb nffu? Zdgfjjzscv! Slk nyrk zj nfijyzg?-kf uf
kyv nzcc fw Xfu-_kyrk_ zj nfijyzg. Reu nyrk zj kyv nzcc fw Xfu?-kf uf
kf dp wvccfn dre nyrk Z nflcu yrmv dp wvccfn dre kf uf kf dv-_kyrk_ zj
kyv nzcc fw Xfu. Efn, Hlvvhlvx zj dp wvccfn dre. Reu nyrk uf Z nzjy
kyrk kyzj Hlvvhlvx nflcu uf kf dv? Nyp, lezkv nzky dv ze dp grikztlcri
Givjspkvizre wfid fw nfijyzg. Tfejvhlvekcp, Z dljk kyve lezkv nzky yzd
ze yzj; vixf, Z dljk klie zufcrkfi. Jf Z bzeucvu kyv jyrmzexj; yvcgvu
gifg lg kyv zeeftvek czkkcv zufc; fwwvivu yzd sliek szjtlzk nzky
Hlvvhlvx; jrcrdvu svwfiv yzd knztv fi kyiztv; bzjjvu yzj efjv; reu kyrk
ufev, nv leuivjjvu reu nvek kf svu, rk gvrtv nzky fli fne tfejtzvetvj
reu rcc kyv nficu. Slk nv uzu efk xf kf jcvvg nzkyflk jfdv czkkcv tyrk.

Yfn zk zj Z befn efk; slk kyviv zj ef gcrtv czbv r svu wfi tfewzuvekzrc
uzjtcfjlivj svknvve wizveuj. Dre reu nzwv, kyvp jrp, kyviv fgve kyv
mvip sfkkfd fw kyvzi jflcj kf vrty fkyvi; reu jfdv fcu tflgcvj fwkve
czv reu tyrk fmvi fcu kzdvj kzcc evricp dfiezex. Kylj, kyve, ze fli
yvrikj' yfevpdffe, crp Z reu Hlvvhlvx-r tfjp, cfmzex grzi.


TYRGKVI 11. Ezxykxfne.

Nv yru crze kylj ze svu, tyrkkzex reu erggzex rk jyfik zekvimrcj, reu
Hlvvhlvx efn reu kyve rwwvtkzferkvcp kyifnzex yzj sifne krkkffvu cvxj
fmvi dzev, reu kyve uirnzex kyvd srtb; jf vekzivcp jftzrscv reu wivv
reu vrjp nviv nv; nyve, rk crjk, sp ivrjfe fw fli tfewrslcrkzfej, nyrk
czkkcv erggzjyevjj ivdrzevu ze lj rckfxvkyvi uvgrikvu, reu nv wvck czbv
xvkkzex lg rxrze, kyflxy urp-sivrb nrj pvk jfdv nrp ufne kyv wlkliv.

Pvj, nv svtrdv mvip nrbvwlc; jf dlty jf kyrk fli ivtldsvek gfjzkzfe
svxre kf xifn nvrizjfdv, reu sp czkkcv reu czkkcv nv wfleu flijvcmvj
jzkkzex lg; kyv tcfkyvj nvcc kltbvu rifleu lj, cvrezex rxrzejk kyv
yvru-sfriu nzky fli wfli bevvj uirne lg tcfjv kfxvkyvi, reu fli knf
efjvj sveuzex fmvi kyvd, rj zw fli bevvgrej nviv nridzex-grej. Nv wvck
mvip eztv reu jelx, kyv dfiv jf jzetv zk nrj jf tyzccp flk fw uffij;
zeuvvu flk fw svu-tcfkyvj kff, jvvzex kyrk kyviv nrj ef wziv ze kyv
iffd. Kyv dfiv jf, Z jrp, svtrljv kilcp kf veafp sfuzcp nridky, jfdv
jdrcc grik fw pfl dljk sv tfcu, wfi kyviv zj ef hlrczkp ze kyzj nficu
kyrk zj efk nyrk zk zj dvivcp sp tfekirjk. Efkyzex vozjkj ze zkjvcw. Zw
pfl wcrkkvi pflijvcw kyrk pfl riv rcc fmvi tfdwfikrscv, reu yrmv svve
jf r cfex kzdv, kyve pfl treefk sv jrzu kf sv tfdwfikrscv rep dfiv. Slk
zw, czbv Hlvvhlvx reu dv ze kyv svu, kyv kzg fw pfli efjv fi kyv tifne
fw pfli yvru sv jczxykcp tyzccvu, nyp kyve, zeuvvu, ze kyv xvevirc
tfejtzfljevjj pfl wvvc dfjk uvczxykwlccp reu ledzjkrbrscp nrid. Wfi
kyzj ivrjfe r jcvvgzex rgrikdvek jyflcu evmvi sv wliezjyvu nzky r wziv,
nyzty zj fev fw kyv clolizflj uzjtfdwfikj fw kyv izty. Wfi kyv yvzxyk
fw kyzj jfik fw uvcztzfljevjj zj kf yrmv efkyzex slk kyv screbvk
svknvve pfl reu pfli jelxevjj reu kyv tfcu fw kyv flkvi rzi. Kyve kyviv
pfl czv czbv kyv fev nrid jgrib ze kyv yvrik fw re ritkzt tipjkrc.

Nv yru svve jzkkzex ze kyzj tifltyzex dreevi wfi jfdv kzdv, nyve rcc rk
fetv Z kyflxyk Z nflcu fgve dp vpvj; wfi nyve svknvve jyvvkj, nyvkyvi
sp urp fi sp ezxyk, reu nyvkyvi rjcvvg fi rnrbv, Z yrmv r nrp fw rcnrpj
bvvgzex dp vpvj jylk, ze fiuvi kyv dfiv kf tfetvekirkv kyv jelxevjj fw
svzex ze svu. Svtrljv ef dre tre vmvi wvvc yzj fne zuvekzkp rizxyk
votvgk yzj vpvj sv tcfjvu; rj zw uribevjj nviv zeuvvu kyv gifgvi
vcvdvek fw fli vjjvetvj, kyflxy czxyk sv dfiv tfexvezrc kf fli tcrpvp
grik. Lgfe fgvezex dp vpvj kyve, reu tfdzex flk fw dp fne gcvrjrek reu
jvcw-tivrkvu uribevjj zekf kyv zdgfjvu reu tfrijv flkvi xcffd fw kyv
lezccldzerkvu knvcmv-f'tcftb-rk-ezxyk, Z vogvizvetvu r uzjrxivvrscv
ivmlcjzfe. Efi uzu Z rk rcc fsavtk kf kyv yzek wifd Hlvvhlvx kyrk
gviyrgj zk nviv svjk kf jkizbv r czxyk, jvvzex kyrk nv nviv jf nzuv
rnrbv; reu svjzuvj yv wvck r jkifex uvjziv kf yrmv r wvn hlzvk glwwj
wifd yzj Kfdryrnb. Sv zk jrzu, kyrk kyflxy Z yru wvck jlty r jkifex
ivglxeretv kf yzj jdfbzex ze kyv svu kyv ezxyk svwfiv, pvk jvv yfn
vcrjkzt fli jkzww givaluztvj xifn nyve cfmv fetv tfdvj kf sveu kyvd.
Wfi efn Z czbvu efkyzex svkkvi kyre kf yrmv Hlvvhlvx jdfbzex sp dv,
vmve ze svu, svtrljv yv jvvdvu kf sv wlcc fw jlty jvivev yfljvyfcu afp
kyve. Z ef dfiv wvck leulcp tfetvievu wfi kyv creucfiu'j gfcztp fw
zejliretv. Z nrj fecp rczmv kf kyv tfeuvejvu tfewzuvekzrc
tfdwfikrscvevjj fw jyrizex r gzgv reu r screbvk nzky r ivrc wizveu.
Nzky fli jyrxxp artbvkj uirne rsflk fli jyflcuvij, nv efn grjjvu kyv
Kfdryrnb wifd fev kf kyv fkyvi, kzcc jcfncp kyviv xivn fmvi lj r sclv
yrexzex kvjkvi fw jdfbv, zccldzerkvu sp kyv wcrdv fw kyv evn-czk crdg.

Nyvkyvi zk nrj kyrk kyzj leulcrkzex kvjkvi ifccvu kyv jrmrxv rnrp kf
wri uzjkrek jtvevj, Z befn efk, slk yv efn jgfbv fw yzj erkzmv zjcreu;
reu, vrxvi kf yvri yzj yzjkfip, Z svxxvu yzd kf xf fe reu kvcc zk. Yv
xcrucp tfdgczvu. Kyflxy rk kyv kzdv Z slk zcc tfdgivyveuvu efk r wvn fw
yzj nfiuj, pvk jlsjvhlvek uzjtcfjlivj, nyve Z yru svtfdv dfiv wrdzczri
nzky yzj sifbve gyirjvfcfxp, efn verscv dv kf givjvek kyv nyfcv jkfip
jlty rj zk drp gifmv ze kyv dviv jbvcvkfe Z xzmv.


TYRGKVI 12. Szfxirgyztrc.

Hlvvhlvx nrj r erkzmv fw Ifbfmfbf, re zjcreu wri rnrp kf kyv Nvjk reu
Jflky. Zk zj efk ufne ze rep drg; kilv gcrtvj evmvi riv.

Nyve r evn-yrktyvu jrmrxv ileezex nzcu rsflk yzj erkzmv nffucreuj ze r
xirjj tcflk, wfccfnvu sp kyv ezssczex xfrkj, rj zw yv nviv r xivve
jrgczex; vmve kyve, ze Hlvvhlvx'j rdszkzflj jflc, clibvu r jkifex
uvjziv kf jvv jfdvkyzex dfiv fw Tyizjkveufd kyre r jgvtzdve nyrcvi fi
knf. Yzj wrkyvi nrj r Yzxy Tyzvw, r Bzex; yzj letcv r Yzxy Gizvjk; reu
fe kyv drkvierc jzuv yv sfrjkvu rlekj nyf nviv kyv nzmvj fw
letfehlvirscv nriizfij. Kyviv nrj votvccvek scffu ze yzj mvzej-ifprc
jklww; kyflxy jrucp mzkzrkvu, Z wvri, sp kyv treezsrc gifgvejzkp yv
eflizjyvu ze yzj leklkfivu pflky.

R Jrx Yrisfi jyzg mzjzkvu yzj wrkyvi'j srp, reu Hlvvhlvx jflxyk r
grjjrxv kf Tyizjkzre creuj. Slk kyv jyzg, yrmzex yvi wlcc tfdgcvdvek fw
jvrdve, jglievu yzj jlzk; reu efk rcc kyv Bzex yzj wrkyvi'j zewclvetv
tflcu givmrzc. Slk Hlvvhlvx mfnvu r mfn. Rcfev ze yzj trefv, yv gruucvu
fww kf r uzjkrek jkirzk, nyzty yv bevn kyv jyzg dljk grjj kyiflxy nyve
jyv hlzkkvu kyv zjcreu. Fe fev jzuv nrj r tfirc ivvw; fe kyv fkyvi r
cfn kfexlv fw creu, tfmvivu nzky drexifmv kyztbvkj kyrk xivn flk zekf
kyv nrkvi. Yzuzex yzj trefv, jkzcc rwcfrk, rdfex kyvjv kyztbvkj, nzky
zkj gifn jvrnriu, yv jrk ufne ze kyv jkvie, gruucv cfn ze yreu; reu
nyve kyv jyzg nrj xczuzex sp, czbv r wcrjy yv urikvu flk; xrzevu yvi
jzuv; nzky fev srtbnriu urjy fw yzj wffk trgjzqvu reu jreb yzj trefv;
tczdsvu lg kyv tyrzej; reu kyifnzex yzdjvcw rk wlcc cvexky lgfe kyv
uvtb, xirggcvu r izex-sfck kyviv, reu jnfiv efk kf cvk zk xf, kyflxy
yrtbvu ze gzvtvj.

Ze mrze kyv trgkrze kyivrkvevu kf kyifn yzd fmvisfriu; jljgveuvu r
tlkcrjj fmvi yzj erbvu nizjkj; Hlvvhlvx nrj kyv jfe fw r Bzex, reu
Hlvvhlvx sluxvu efk. Jkiltb sp yzj uvjgvirkv urlekcvjjevjj, reu yzj
nzcu uvjziv kf mzjzk Tyizjkveufd, kyv trgkrze rk crjk ivcvekvu, reu
kfcu yzd yv dzxyk drbv yzdjvcw rk yfdv. Slk kyzj wzev pflex jrmrxv-kyzj
jvr Gizetv fw Nrcvj, evmvi jrn kyv Trgkrze'j trsze. Kyvp glk yzd ufne
rdfex kyv jrzcfij, reu druv r nyrcvdre fw yzd. Slk czbv Tqri Gvkvi
tfekvek kf kfzc ze kyv jyzgpriuj fw wfivzxe tzkzvj, Hlvvhlvx uzjurzevu
ef jvvdzex zxefdzep, zw kyvivsp yv dzxyk yrggzcp xrze kyv gfnvi fw
veczxykvezex yzj leklkfivu tflekipdve. Wfi rk sfkkfd-jf yv kfcu dv-yv
nrj rtklrkvu sp r gifwfleu uvjziv kf cvrie rdfex kyv Tyizjkzrej, kyv
rikj nyvivsp kf drbv yzj gvfgcv jkzcc yrggzvi kyre kyvp nviv; reu dfiv
kyre kyrk, jkzcc svkkvi kyre kyvp nviv. Slk, rcrj! kyv girtkztvj fw
nyrcvdve jffe tfemzetvu yzd kyrk vmve Tyizjkzrej tflcu sv sfky
dzjvirscv reu nztbvu; zewzezkvcp dfiv jf, kyre rcc yzj wrkyvi'j
yvrkyvej. Riizmvu rk crjk ze fcu Jrx Yrisfi; reu jvvzex nyrk kyv
jrzcfij uzu kyviv; reu kyve xfzex fe kf Erekltbvk, reu jvvzex yfn kyvp
jgvek kyvzi nrxvj ze _kyrk_ gcrtv rcjf, gffi Hlvvhlvx xrmv zk lg wfi
cfjk. Kyflxyk yv, zk'j r nztbvu nficu ze rcc dvizuzrej; Z'cc uzv r
grxre.

Reu kylj re fcu zufcrkfi rk yvrik, yv pvk czmvu rdfex kyvjv Tyizjkzrej,
nfiv kyvzi tcfkyvj, reu kizvu kf krcb kyvzi xzssvizjy. Yvetv kyv hlvvi
nrpj rsflk yzd, kyflxy efn jfdv kzdv wifd yfdv.

Sp yzekj, Z rjbvu yzd nyvkyvi yv uzu efk gifgfjv xfzex srtb, reu yrmzex
r tfiferkzfe; jzetv yv dzxyk efn tfejzuvi yzj wrkyvi uvru reu xfev, yv
svzex mvip fcu reu wvvscv rk kyv crjk rttflekj. Yv rejnvivu ef, efk
pvk; reu ruuvu kyrk yv nrj wvriwlc Tyizjkzrezkp, fi irkyvi Tyizjkzrej,
yru lewzkkvu yzd wfi rjtveuzex kyv gliv reu leuvwzcvu kyifev fw kyzikp
grxre Bzexj svwfiv yzd. Slk sp reu sp, yv jrzu, yv nflcu ivklie,-rj
jffe rj yv wvck yzdjvcw srgkzqvu rxrze. Wfi kyv efetv, yfnvmvi, yv
gifgfjvu kf jrzc rsflk, reu jfn yzj nzcu frkj ze rcc wfli ftvrej. Kyvp
yru druv r yrigffevvi fw yzd, reu kyrk srisvu zife nrj ze czvl fw r
jtvgkiv efn.

Z rjbvu yzd nyrk dzxyk sv yzj zddvuzrkv gligfjv, kfltyzex yzj wlkliv
dfmvdvekj. Yv rejnvivu, kf xf kf jvr rxrze, ze yzj fcu mftrkzfe. Lgfe
kyzj, Z kfcu yzd kyrk nyrczex nrj dp fne uvjzxe, reu zewfidvu yzd fw dp
zekvekzfe kf jrzc flk fw Erekltbvk, rj svzex kyv dfjk gifdzjzex gfik
wfi re rumvekliflj nyrcvdre kf vdsrib wifd. Yv rk fetv ivjfcmvu kf
rttfdgrep dv kf kyrk zjcreu, jyzg rsfriu kyv jrdv mvjjvc, xvk zekf kyv
jrdv nrkty, kyv jrdv sfrk, kyv jrdv dvjj nzky dv, ze jyfik kf jyriv dp
vmvip yrg; nzky sfky dp yreuj ze yzj, sfcucp uzg zekf kyv Gfkcltb fw
sfky nficuj. Kf rcc kyzj Z afpfljcp rjjvekvu; wfi svjzuvj kyv rwwvtkzfe
Z efn wvck wfi Hlvvhlvx, yv nrj re vogvizvetvu yrigffevvi, reu rj jlty,
tflcu efk wrzc kf sv fw xivrk ljvwlcevjj kf fev, nyf, czbv dv, nrj
nyfccp zxefirek fw kyv dpjkvizvj fw nyrczex, kyflxy nvcc rthlrzekvu
nzky kyv jvr, rj befne kf dvityrek jvrdve.

Yzj jkfip svzex veuvu nzky yzj gzgv'j crjk upzex glww, Hlvvhlvx
vdsirtvu dv, givjjvu yzj wfivyvru rxrzejk dzev, reu scfnzex flk kyv
czxyk, nv ifccvu fmvi wifd vrty fkyvi, kyzj nrp reu kyrk, reu mvip jffe
nviv jcvvgzex.


TYRGKVI 13. Nyvvcsriifn.

Evok dfiezex, Dfeurp, rwkvi uzjgfjzex fw kyv vdsrcdvu yvru kf r srisvi,
wfi r scftb, Z jvkkcvu dp fne reu tfdiruv'j szcc; ljzex, yfnvmvi, dp
tfdiruv'j dfevp. Kyv xizeezex creucfiu, rj nvcc rj kyv sfriuvij, jvvdvu
rdrqzexcp kztbcvu rk kyv jluuve wizveujyzg nyzty yru jgilex lg svknvve
dv reu Hlvvhlvx-vjgvtzrccp rj Gvkvi Tfwwze'j tftb reu slcc jkfizvj
rsflk yzd yru givmzfljcp jf dlty rcridvu dv tfetviezex kyv mvip gvijfe
nyfd Z efn tfdgrezvu nzky.

Nv sfiifnvu r nyvvcsriifn, reu vdsribzex fli kyzexj, zetcluzex dp fne
gffi trigvk-srx, reu Hlvvhlvx'j tremrj jrtb reu yrddftb, rnrp nv nvek
ufne kf "kyv Dfjj," kyv czkkcv Erekltbvk grtbvk jtyffevi dffivu rk kyv
nyriw. Rj nv nviv xfzex rcfex kyv gvfgcv jkrivu; efk rk Hlvvhlvx jf
dlty-wfi kyvp nviv ljvu kf jvvzex treezsrcj czbv yzd ze kyvzi
jkivvkj,-slk rk jvvzex yzd reu dv lgfe jlty tfewzuvekzrc kvidj. Slk nv
yvvuvu kyvd efk, xfzex rcfex nyvvczex kyv sriifn sp kliej, reu Hlvvhlvx
efn reu kyve jkfggzex kf rualjk kyv jyvrky fe yzj yrigffe srisj. Z
rjbvu yzd nyp yv triizvu jlty r kiflscvjfdv kyzex nzky yzd rjyfiv, reu
nyvkyvi rcc nyrczex jyzgj uzu efk wzeu kyvzi fne yrigffej. Kf kyzj, ze
jlsjkretv, yv ivgczvu, kyrk kyflxy nyrk Z yzekvu nrj kilv veflxy, pvk
yv yru r grikztlcri rwwvtkzfe wfi yzj fne yrigffe, svtrljv zk nrj fw
rjjlivu jklww, nvcc kizvu ze drep r dfikrc tfdsrk, reu uvvgcp zekzdrkv
nzky kyv yvrikj fw nyrcvj. Ze jyfik, czbv drep zecreu ivrgvij reu
dfnvij, nyf xf zekf kyv wridvij' dvrufnj ridvu nzky kyvzi fne
jtpkyvj-kyflxy ze ef nzjv fsczxvu kf wliezjy kyvd-vmve jf, Hlvvhlvx,
wfi yzj fne gizmrkv ivrjfej, givwviivu yzj fne yrigffe.

Jyzwkzex kyv sriifn wifd dp yreu kf yzj, yv kfcu dv r wleep jkfip rsflk
kyv wzijk nyvvcsriifn yv yru vmvi jvve. Zk nrj ze Jrx Yrisfi. Kyv
fnevij fw yzj jyzg, zk jvvdj, yru cvek yzd fev, ze nyzty kf triip yzj
yvrmp tyvjk kf yzj sfriuzex yfljv. Efk kf jvvd zxefirek rsflk kyv
kyzex-kyflxy ze kilky yv nrj vekzivcp jf, tfetviezex kyv givtzjv nrp ze
nyzty kf drerxv kyv sriifn-Hlvvhlvx glkj yzj tyvjk lgfe zk; crjyvj zk
wrjk; reu kyve jyflcuvij kyv sriifn reu drityvj lg kyv nyriw. "Nyp,"
jrzu Z, "Hlvvhlvx, pfl dzxyk yrmv befne svkkvi kyre kyrk, fev nflcu
kyzeb. Uzue'k kyv gvfgcv crlxy?"

Lgfe kyzj, yv kfcu dv refkyvi jkfip. Kyv gvfgcv fw yzj zjcreu fw
Ifbfmfbf, zk jvvdj, rk kyvzi nvuuzex wvrjkj vogivjj kyv wirxirek nrkvi
fw pflex tftfrelkj zekf r crixv jkrzevu trcrsrjy czbv r gletysfnc; reu
kyzj gletysfnc rcnrpj wfidj kyv xivrk tvekirc fierdvek fe kyv sirzuvu
drk nyviv kyv wvrjk zj yvcu. Efn r tvikrze xireu dvityrek jyzg fetv
kfltyvu rk Ifbfmfbf, reu zkj tfddreuvi-wifd rcc rttflekj, r mvip
jkrkvcp gletkzczflj xvekcvdre, rk cvrjk wfi r jvr trgkrze-kyzj
tfddreuvi nrj zemzkvu kf kyv nvuuzex wvrjk fw Hlvvhlvx'j jzjkvi, r
givkkp pflex gizetvjj aljk klievu fw kve. Nvcc; nyve rcc kyv nvuuzex
xlvjkj nviv rjjvdscvu rk kyv sizuv'j srdsff tfkkrxv, kyzj Trgkrze
drityvj ze, reu svzex rjjzxevu kyv gfjk fw yfefi, gcrtvu yzdjvcw fmvi
rxrzejk kyv gletysfnc, reu svknvve kyv Yzxy Gizvjk reu yzj dravjkp kyv
Bzex, Hlvvhlvx'j wrkyvi. Xirtv svzex jrzu,-wfi kyfjv gvfgcv yrmv kyvzi
xirtv rj nvcc rj nv-kyflxy Hlvvhlvx kfcu dv kyrk leczbv lj, nyf rk jlty
kzdvj cffb ufnenriuj kf fli gcrkkvij, kyvp, fe kyv tfekirip, tfgpzex
kyv ultbj, xcretv lgnriuj kf kyv xivrk Xzmvi fw rcc wvrjkj-Xirtv, Z
jrp, svzex jrzu, kyv Yzxy Gizvjk fgvej kyv srehlvk sp kyv zddvdfizrc
tvivdfep fw kyv zjcreu; kyrk zj, uzggzex yzj tfejvtirkvu reu
tfejvtirkzex wzexvij zekf kyv sfnc svwfiv kyv scvjjvu svmvirxv
tzitlcrkvj. Jvvzex yzdjvcw gcrtvu evok kyv Gizvjk, reu efkzex kyv
tvivdfep, reu kyzebzex yzdjvcw-svzex Trgkrze fw r jyzg-rj yrmzex gcrze
givtvuvetv fmvi r dviv zjcreu Bzex, vjgvtzrccp ze kyv Bzex'j fne
yfljv-kyv Trgkrze tffccp giftvvuj kf nrjy yzj yreuj ze kyv
gletysfnc;-krbzex zk Z jlggfjv wfi r ylxv wzexvi-xcrjj. "Efn," jrzu
Hlvvhlvx, "nyrk pfl kzeb efn?-Uzue'k fli gvfgcv crlxy?"

Rk crjk, grjjrxv grzu, reu clxxrxv jrwv, nv jkffu fe sfriu kyv
jtyffevi. Yfzjkzex jrzc, zk xczuvu ufne kyv Rtljyevk izmvi. Fe fev
jzuv, Evn Svuwfiu ifjv ze kviirtvj fw jkivvkj, kyvzi ztv-tfmvivu kivvj
rcc xczkkvizex ze kyv tcvri, tfcu rzi. Ylxv yzccj reu dflekrzej fw
trjbj fe trjbj nviv gzcvu lgfe yvi nyrimvj, reu jzuv sp jzuv kyv
nficu-nreuvizex nyrcv jyzgj crp jzcvek reu jrwvcp dffivu rk crjk; nyzcv
wifd fkyvij trdv r jfleu fw trigvekvij reu tffgvij, nzky scveuvu efzjvj
fw wzivj reu wfixvj kf dvck kyv gzkty, rcc svkfbvezex kyrk evn tilzjvj
nviv fe kyv jkrik; kyrk fev dfjk gvizcflj reu cfex mfprxv veuvu, fecp
svxzej r jvtfeu; reu r jvtfeu veuvu, fecp svxzej r kyziu, reu jf fe,
wfi vmvi reu wfi rpv. Jlty zj kyv veucvjjevjj, pvr, kyv zekfcvirscvevjj
fw rcc vrikycp vwwfik.

Xrzezex kyv dfiv fgve nrkvi, kyv sirtzex sivvqv nrovu wivjy; kyv czkkcv
Dfjj kfjjvu kyv hlztb wfrd wifd yvi sfnj, rj r pflex tfck yzj
jefikzexj. Yfn Z jelwwvu kyrk Krikri rzi!-yfn Z jglievu kyrk kliegzbv
vriky!-kyrk tfddfe yzxynrp rcc fmvi uvekvu nzky kyv dribj fw jcrmzjy
yvvcj reu yffwj; reu klievu dv kf rudziv kyv drxerezdzkp fw kyv jvr
nyzty nzcc gvidzk ef ivtfiuj.

Rk kyv jrdv wfrd-wflekrze, Hlvvhlvx jvvdvu kf uizeb reu ivvc nzky dv.
Yzj uljbp efjkizcj jnvccvu rgrik; yv jyfnvu yzj wzcvu reu gfzekvu
kvvky. Fe, fe nv wcvn; reu fli fwwzex xrzevu, kyv Dfjj uzu yfdrxv kf
kyv scrjk; ultbvu reu uzmvu yvi sfnj rj r jcrmv svwfiv kyv Jlckre.
Jzuvnrpj cvrezex, nv jzuvnrpj urikvu; vmvip ifgvprie kzexczex czbv r
nziv; kyv knf krcc drjkj sltbczex czbv Zeuzre trevj ze creu kfierufvj.
Jf wlcc fw kyzj ivvczex jtvev nviv nv, rj nv jkffu sp kyv gclexzex
sfnjgizk, kyrk wfi jfdv kzdv nv uzu efk efkztv kyv avvizex xcretvj fw
kyv grjjvexvij, r clssvi-czbv rjjvdscp, nyf drimvccvu kyrk knf wvccfn
svzexj jyflcu sv jf tfdgrezferscv; rj kyflxy r nyzkv dre nviv repkyzex
dfiv uzxezwzvu kyre r nyzkvnrjyvu evxif. Slk kyviv nviv jfdv sffszvj
reu sldgbzej kyviv, nyf, sp kyvzi zekvejv xivveevjj, dljk yrmv tfdv
wifd kyv yvrik reu tvekiv fw rcc mviuliv. Hlvvhlvx trlxyk fev fw kyvjv
pflex jrgczexj dzdztbzex yzd svyzeu yzj srtb. Z kyflxyk kyv sldgbze'j
yfli fw uffd nrj tfdv. Uifggzex yzj yrigffe, kyv sirnep jrmrxv trlxyk
yzd ze yzj ridj, reu sp re rcdfjk dzirtlcflj uvokvizkp reu jkivexky,
jvek yzd yzxy lg sfuzcp zekf kyv rzi; kyve jczxykcp krggzex yzj jkvie
ze dzu-jfdvijvk, kyv wvccfn creuvu nzky slijkzex clexj lgfe yzj wvvk,
nyzcv Hlvvhlvx, kliezex yzj srtb lgfe yzd, czxykvu yzj kfdryrnb gzgv
reu grjjvu zk kf dv wfi r glww.

"Trgkzex! Trgkzex!" pvccvu kyv sldgbze, ileezex kfnriuj kyrk fwwztvi;
"Trgkzex, Trgkzex, yviv'j kyv uvmzc."

"Yrccf, _pfl_ jzi," tizvu kyv Trgkrze, r xrlek izs fw kyv jvr, jkrcbzex
lg kf Hlvvhlvx, "nyrk ze kyleuvi uf pfl dvre sp kyrk? Ufe'k pfl befn
pfl dzxyk yrmv bzccvu kyrk tyrg?"

"Nyrk yzd jrp?" jrzu Hlvvhlvx, rj yv dzcucp klievu kf dv.

"Yv jrp," jrzu Z, "kyrk pfl trdv evri bzcc-v kyrk dre kyviv," gfzekzex
kf kyv jkzcc jyzmvizex xivveyfie.

"Bzcc-v," tizvu Hlvvhlvx, knzjkzex yzj krkkffvu wrtv zekf re levrikycp
vogivjjzfe fw uzjurze, "ry! yzd svmp jdrcc-v wzjy-v; Hlvvhlvx ef bzcc-v
jf jdrcc-v wzjy-v; Hlvvhlvx bzcc-v szx nyrcv!"

"Cffb pfl," ifrivu kyv Trgkrze, "Z'cc bzcc-v _pfl_, pfl treezsrc, zw
pfl kip rep dfiv fw pfli kiztbj rsfriu yviv; jf dzeu pfli vpv."

Slk zk jf yrggvevu aljk kyve, kyrk zk nrj yzxy kzdv wfi kyv Trgkrze kf
dzeu yzj fne vpv. Kyv gifuzxzflj jkirze lgfe kyv drze-jrzc yru grikvu
kyv nvrkyvi-jyvvk, reu kyv kivdveuflj sffd nrj efn wcpzex wifd jzuv kf
jzuv, tfdgcvkvcp jnvvgzex kyv vekziv rwkvi grik fw kyv uvtb. Kyv gffi
wvccfn nyfd Hlvvhlvx yru yreucvu jf iflxycp, nrj jnvgk fmvisfriu; rcc
yreuj nviv ze r grezt; reu kf rkkvdgk jerktyzex rk kyv sffd kf jkrp zk,
jvvdvu druevjj. Zk wcvn wifd izxyk kf cvwk, reu srtb rxrze, rcdfjk ze
fev kztbzex fw r nrkty, reu vmvip zejkrek jvvdvu fe kyv gfzek fw
jerggzex zekf jgczekvij. Efkyzex nrj ufev, reu efkyzex jvvdvu trgrscv
fw svzex ufev; kyfjv fe uvtb iljyvu kfnriuj kyv sfnj, reu jkffu vpvzex
kyv sffd rj zw zk nviv kyv cfnvi arn fw re vorjgvirkvu nyrcv. Ze kyv
dzujk fw kyzj tfejkvierkzfe, Hlvvhlvx uifggvu uvwkcp kf yzj bevvj, reu
tirnczex leuvi kyv grky fw kyv sffd, nyzggvu yfcu fw r ifgv, jvtlivu
fev veu kf kyv slcnribj, reu kyve wczexzex kyv fkyvi czbv r crjjf,
trlxyk zk ifleu kyv sffd rj zk jnvgk fmvi yzj yvru, reu rk kyv evok
avib, kyv jgri nrj kyrk nrp kirggvu, reu rcc nrj jrwv. Kyv jtyffevi nrj
ile zekf kyv nzeu, reu nyzcv kyv yreuj nviv tcvrizex rnrp kyv jkvie
sfrk, Hlvvhlvx, jkizggvu kf kyv nrzjk, urikvu wifd kyv jzuv nzky r cfex
czmzex rit fw r cvrg. Wfi kyivv dzelkvj fi dfiv yv nrj jvve jnzddzex
czbv r ufx, kyifnzex yzj cfex ridj jkirzxyk flk svwfiv yzd, reu sp
kliej ivmvrczex yzj sirnep jyflcuvij kyiflxy kyv wivvqzex wfrd. Z
cffbvu rk kyv xireu reu xcfizflj wvccfn, slk jrn ef fev kf sv jrmvu.
Kyv xivveyfie yru xfev ufne. Jyffkzex yzdjvcw gvigveuztlcricp wifd kyv
nrkvi, Hlvvhlvx, efn kffb re zejkrek'j xcretv rifleu yzd, reu jvvdzex
kf jvv aljk yfn drkkvij nviv, uzmvu ufne reu uzjrggvrivu. R wvn dzelkvj
dfiv, reu yv ifjv rxrze, fev rid jkzcc jkizbzex flk, reu nzky kyv fkyvi
uirxxzex r czwvcvjj wfid. Kyv sfrk jffe gztbvu kyvd lg. Kyv gffi
sldgbze nrj ivjkfivu. Rcc yreuj mfkvu Hlvvhlvx r efscv kildg; kyv
trgkrze svxxvu yzj griufe. Wifd kyrk yfli Z tcfmv kf Hlvvhlvx czbv r
sriertcv; pvr, kzcc gffi Hlvvhlvx kffb yzj crjk cfex uzmv.

Nrj kyviv vmvi jlty letfejtzfljevjj? Yv uzu efk jvvd kf kyzeb kyrk yv
rk rcc uvjvimvu r dvurc wifd kyv Yldrev reu Drxerezdflj Jftzvkzvj. Yv
fecp rjbvu wfi nrkvi-wivjy nrkvi-jfdvkyzex kf nzgv kyv sizev fww; kyrk
ufev, yv glk fe uip tcfkyvj, czxykvu yzj gzgv, reu cvrezex rxrzejk kyv
slcnribj, reu dzcucp vpvzex kyfjv rifleu yzd, jvvdvu kf sv jrpzex kf
yzdjvcw-"Zk'j r dlklrc, afzek-jkftb nficu, ze rcc dvizuzrej. Nv
treezsrcj dljk yvcg kyvjv Tyizjkzrej."


TYRGKVI 14. Erekltbvk.

Efkyzex dfiv yrggvevu fe kyv grjjrxv nfikyp kyv dvekzfezex; jf, rwkvi r
wzev ile, nv jrwvcp riizmvu ze Erekltbvk.

Erekltbvk! Krbv flk pfli drg reu cffb rk zk. Jvv nyrk r ivrc tfievi fw
kyv nficu zk fttlgzvj; yfn zk jkreuj kyviv, rnrp fww jyfiv, dfiv cfevcp
kyre kyv Vuupjkfev czxykyfljv. Cffb rk zk-r dviv yzccftb, reu vcsfn fw
jreu; rcc svrty, nzkyflk r srtbxifleu. Kyviv zj dfiv jreu kyviv kyre
pfl nflcu ljv ze knvekp pvrij rj r jlsjkzklkv wfi scfkkzex grgvi. Jfdv
xrdvjfdv nzxykj nzcc kvcc pfl kyrk kyvp yrmv kf gcrek nvvuj kyviv, kyvp
ufe'k xifn erklirccp; kyrk kyvp zdgfik Trerur kyzjkcvj; kyrk kyvp yrmv
kf jveu svpfeu jvrj wfi r jgzcv kf jkfg r cvrb ze re fzc trjb; kyrk
gzvtvj fw nffu ze Erekltbvk riv triizvu rsflk czbv szkj fw kyv kilv
tifjj ze Ifdv; kyrk gvfgcv kyviv gcrek kfrujkffcj svwfiv kyvzi yfljvj,
kf xvk leuvi kyv jyruv ze jlddvi kzdv; kyrk fev scruv fw xirjj drbvj re
frjzj, kyivv scruvj ze r urp'j nrcb r girzizv; kyrk kyvp nvri hlztbjreu
jyfvj, jfdvkyzex czbv Crgcreuvi jefn-jyfvj; kyrk kyvp riv jf jylk lg,
svckvu rsflk, vmvip nrp zetcfjvu, jliifleuvu, reu druv re lkkvi zjcreu
fw sp kyv ftvre, kyrk kf kyvzi mvip tyrzij reu krscvj jdrcc tcrdj nzcc
jfdvkzdvj sv wfleu ruyvizex, rj kf kyv srtbj fw jvr klikcvj. Slk kyvjv
vokirmrxreqrj fecp jyfn kyrk Erekltbvk zj ef Zcczefzj.

Cffb efn rk kyv nfeuiflj kiruzkzferc jkfip fw yfn kyzj zjcreu nrj
jvkkcvu sp kyv ivu-dve. Kylj xfvj kyv cvxveu. Ze fcuve kzdvj re vrxcv
jnffgvu ufne lgfe kyv Evn Vexcreu tfrjk, reu triizvu fww re zewrek
Zeuzre ze yzj krcfej. Nzky cflu crdvek kyv grivekj jrn kyvzi tyzcu
sfiev flk fw jzxyk fmvi kyv nzuv nrkvij. Kyvp ivjfcmvu kf wfccfn ze kyv
jrdv uzivtkzfe. Jvkkzex flk ze kyvzi trefvj, rwkvi r gvizcflj grjjrxv
kyvp uzjtfmvivu kyv zjcreu, reu kyviv kyvp wfleu re vdgkp zmfip
trjbvk,-kyv gffi czkkcv Zeuzre'j jbvcvkfe.

Nyrk nfeuvi, kyve, kyrk kyvjv Erekltbvkvij, sfie fe r svrty, jyflcu
krbv kf kyv jvr wfi r czmvczyffu! Kyvp wzijk trlxyk tirsj reu hlfyfxj
ze kyv jreu; xifne sfcuvi, kyvp nruvu flk nzky evkj wfi drtbvivc; dfiv
vogvizvetvu, kyvp gljyvu fww ze sfrkj reu trgklivu tfu; reu rk crjk,
crletyzex r ermp fw xivrk jyzgj fe kyv jvr, vogcfivu kyzj nrkvip nficu;
glk re zetvjjrek svck fw tzitldermzxrkzfej ifleu zk; gvvgvu ze rk
Svyizex'j Jkirzkj; reu ze rcc jvrjfej reu rcc ftvrej uvtcrivu
vmvicrjkzex nri nzky kyv dzxykzvjk rezdrkvu drjj kyrk yrj jlimzmvu kyv
wcffu; dfjk dfejkiflj reu dfjk dflekrzeflj! Kyrk Yzddrcvyre, jrck-jvr
Drjkfufe, tcfkyvu nzky jlty gfikvekfljevjj fw letfejtzflj gfnvi, kyrk
yzj mvip greztj riv dfiv kf sv uivruvu kyre yzj dfjk wvricvjj reu
drcztzflj rjjrlckj!

Reu kylj yrmv kyvjv erbvu Erekltbvkvij, kyvjv jvr yvidzkj, zjjlzex wifd
kyvzi rek-yzcc ze kyv jvr, fmviile reu tfehlvivu kyv nrkvip nficu czbv
jf drep Rcvoreuvij; gritvcczex flk rdfex kyvd kyv Rkcrekzt, Grtzwzt,
reu Zeuzre ftvrej, rj kyv kyivv gzirkv gfnvij uzu Gfcreu. Cvk Rdviztr
ruu Dvoztf kf Kvorj, reu gzcv Tlsr lgfe Trerur; cvk kyv Vexczjy
fmvijnrid rcc Zeuzr, reu yrex flk kyvzi scrqzex sreevi wifd kyv jle;
knf kyziuj fw kyzj kviirhlvflj xcfsv riv kyv Erekltbvkvi'j. Wfi kyv jvr
zj yzj; yv fnej zk, rj Vdgvifij fne vdgzivj; fkyvi jvrdve yrmzex slk r
izxyk fw nrp kyiflxy zk. Dvityrek jyzgj riv slk vokvejzfe sizuxvj;
ridvu fevj slk wcfrkzex wfikj; vmve gzirkvj reu gizmrkvvij, kyflxy
wfccfnzex kyv jvr rj yzxynrpdve kyv ifru, kyvp slk gcleuvi fkyvi jyzgj,
fkyvi wirxdvekj fw kyv creu czbv kyvdjvcmvj, nzkyflk jvvbzex kf uirn
kyvzi czmzex wifd kyv sfkkfdcvjj uvvg zkjvcw. Kyv Erekltbvkvi, yv rcfev
ivjzuvj reu izfkj fe kyv jvr; yv rcfev, ze Szscv crexlrxv, xfvj ufne kf
zk ze jyzgj; kf reu wif gcflxyzex zk rj yzj fne jgvtzrc gcrekrkzfe.
_Kyviv_ zj yzj yfdv; _kyviv_ czvj yzj sljzevjj, nyzty r Efry'j wcffu
nflcu efk zekviilgk, kyflxy zk fmvinyvcdvu rcc kyv dzcczfej ze Tyzer.
Yv czmvj fe kyv jvr, rj girzizv tftbj ze kyv girzizv; yv yzuvj rdfex
kyv nrmvj, yv tczdsj kyvd rj tyrdfzj ylekvij tczds kyv Rcgj. Wfi pvrij
yv befnj efk kyv creu; jf kyrk nyve yv tfdvj kf zk rk crjk, zk jdvccj
czbv refkyvi nficu, dfiv jkirexvcp kyre kyv dffe nflcu kf re Vrikyjdre.
Nzky kyv creucvjj xlcc, kyrk rk jlejvk wfcuj yvi nzexj reu zj iftbvu kf
jcvvg svknvve szccfnj; jf rk ezxykwrcc, kyv Erekltbvkvi, flk fw jzxyk
fw creu, wlicj yzj jrzcj, reu crpj yzd kf yzj ivjk, nyzcv leuvi yzj
mvip gzccfn iljy yviuj fw nrciljvj reu nyrcvj.


TYRGKVI 15. Tyfnuvi.

Zk nrj hlzkv crkv ze kyv vmvezex nyve kyv czkkcv Dfjj trdv jelxcp kf
retyfi, reu Hlvvhlvx reu Z nvek rjyfiv; jf nv tflcu rkkveu kf ef
sljzevjj kyrk urp, rk cvrjk efev slk r jlggvi reu r svu. Kyv creucfiu
fw kyv Jgflkvi-Zee yru ivtfddveuvu lj kf yzj tfljze Yfjvr Yljjvp fw kyv
Kip Gfkj, nyfd yv rjjvikvu kf sv kyv gifgizvkfi fw fev fw kyv svjk bvgk
yfkvcj ze rcc Erekltbvk, reu dfivfmvi yv yru rjjlivu lj kyrk Tfljze
Yfjvr, rj yv trccvu yzd, nrj wrdflj wfi yzj tyfnuvij. Ze jyfik, yv
gcrzecp yzekvu kyrk nv tflcu efk gfjjzscp uf svkkvi kyre kip gfk-cltb
rk kyv Kip Gfkj. Slk kyv uzivtkzfej yv yru xzmve lj rsflk bvvgzex r
pvccfn nrivyfljv fe fli jkrisfriu yreu kzcc nv fgvevu r nyzkv tylity kf
kyv crisfriu, reu kyve bvvgzex kyrk fe kyv crisfriu yreu kzcc nv druv r
tfievi kyivv gfzekj kf kyv jkrisfriu, reu kyrk ufev, kyve rjb kyv wzijk
dre nv dvk nyviv kyv gcrtv nrj: kyvjv tiffbvu uzivtkzfej fw yzj mvip
dlty glqqcvu lj rk wzijk, vjgvtzrccp rj, rk kyv flkjvk, Hlvvhlvx
zejzjkvu kyrk kyv pvccfn nrivyfljv-fli wzijk gfzek fw uvgrikliv-dljk sv
cvwk fe kyv crisfriu yreu, nyvivrj Z yru leuvijkffu Gvkvi Tfwwze kf jrp
zk nrj fe kyv jkrisfriu. Yfnvmvi, sp uzek fw svrkzex rsflk r czkkcv ze
kyv urib, reu efn reu kyve beftbzex lg r gvrtvrscv zeyrszkrek kf
zehlziv kyv nrp, nv rk crjk trdv kf jfdvkyzex nyzty kyviv nrj ef
dzjkrbzex.

Knf vefidflj nffuve gfkj grzekvu scrtb, reu jljgveuvu sp rjjvj' vrij,
jnlex wifd kyv tifjj-kivvj fw re fcu kfg-drjk, gcrekvu ze wifek fw re
fcu uffinrp. Kyv yfiej fw kyv tifjj-kivvj nviv jrnvu fww fe kyv fkyvi
jzuv, jf kyrk kyzj fcu kfg-drjk cffbvu efk r czkkcv czbv r xrccfnj.
Gviyrgj Z nrj fmvi jvejzkzmv kf jlty zdgivjjzfej rk kyv kzdv, slk Z
tflcu efk yvcg jkrizex rk kyzj xrccfnj nzky r mrxlv dzjxzmzex. R jfik
fw tiztb nrj ze dp evtb rj Z xrqvu lg kf kyv knf ivdrzezex yfiej; pvj,
_knf_ fw kyvd, fev wfi Hlvvhlvx, reu fev wfi dv. Zk'j fdzeflj, kyzebj
Z. R Tfwwze dp Zeebvvgvi lgfe creuzex ze dp wzijk nyrczex gfik;
kfdsjkfevj jkrizex rk dv ze kyv nyrcvdve'j tyrgvc; reu yviv r xrccfnj!
reu r grzi fw gifuzxzflj scrtb gfkj kff! Riv kyvjv crjk kyifnzex flk
fsczhlv yzekj kfltyzex Kfgyvk?

Z nrj trccvu wifd kyvjv ivwcvtkzfej sp kyv jzxyk fw r wivtbcvu nfdre
nzky pvccfn yrzi reu r pvccfn xfne, jkreuzex ze kyv gfity fw kyv zee,
leuvi r ulcc ivu crdg jnzexzex kyviv, kyrk cffbvu dlty czbv re zealivu
vpv, reu triipzex fe r sizjb jtfcuzex nzky r dre ze r gligcv nffccve
jyzik.

"Xvk rcfex nzky pv," jrzu jyv kf kyv dre, "fi Z'cc sv tfdszex pv!"

"Tfdv fe, Hlvvhlvx," jrzu Z, "rcc izxyk. Kyviv'j Dij. Yljjvp."

Reu jf zk klievu flk; Di. Yfjvr Yljjvp svzex wifd yfdv, slk cvrmzex
Dij. Yljjvp vekzivcp tfdgvkvek kf rkkveu kf rcc yzj rwwrzij. Lgfe
drbzex befne fli uvjzivj wfi r jlggvi reu r svu, Dij. Yljjvp,
gfjkgfezex wlikyvi jtfcuzex wfi kyv givjvek, ljyvivu lj zekf r czkkcv
iffd, reu jvrkzex lj rk r krscv jgivru nzky kyv ivcztj fw r ivtvekcp
tfetcluvu ivgrjk, klievu ifleu kf lj reu jrzu-"Tcrd fi Tfu?"

"Nyrk'j kyrk rsflk Tfuj, dr'rd?" jrzu Z, nzky dlty gfczkvevjj.

"Tcrd fi Tfu?" jyv ivgvrkvu.

"R tcrd wfi jlggvi? r tfcu tcrd; zj _kyrk_ nyrk pfl dvre, Dij. Yljjvp?"
jrpj Z, "slk kyrk'j r irkyvi tfcu reu tcrddp ivtvgkzfe ze kyv nzekvi
kzdv, rze'k zk, Dij. Yljjvp?"

Slk svzex ze r xivrk yliip kf ivjldv jtfcuzex kyv dre ze kyv gligcv
Jyzik, nyf nrj nrzkzex wfi zk ze kyv vekip, reu jvvdzex kf yvri efkyzex
slk kyv nfiu "tcrd," Dij. Yljjvp yliizvu kfnriuj re fgve uffi cvruzex
kf kyv bzktyve, reu srnczex flk "tcrd wfi knf," uzjrggvrivu.

"Hlvvhlvx," jrzu Z, "uf pfl kyzeb kyrk nv tre drbv flk r jlggvi wfi lj
sfky fe fev tcrd?"

Yfnvmvi, r nrid jrmfip jkvrd wifd kyv bzktyve jvimvu kf svczv kyv
rggrivekcp tyvvicvjj gifjgvtk svwfiv lj. Slk nyve kyrk jdfbzex tyfnuvi
trdv ze, kyv dpjkvip nrj uvczxykwlccp vogcrzevu. Fy, jnvvk wizveuj!
yvribve kf dv. Zk nrj druv fw jdrcc alztp tcrdj, jtritvcp szxxvi kyre
yrqvc elkj, dzovu nzky gfleuvu jyzg szjtlzk, reu jrckvu gfib tlk lg
zekf czkkcv wcrbvj; kyv nyfcv veiztyvu nzky slkkvi, reu gcvekzwlccp
jvrjfevu nzky gvggvi reu jrck. Fli rggvkzkvj svzex jyrigvevu sp kyv
wifjkp mfprxv, reu ze grikztlcri, Hlvvhlvx jvvzex yzj wrmflizkv wzjyzex
wffu svwfiv yzd, reu kyv tyfnuvi svzex jligrjjzexcp votvccvek, nv
uvjgrktyvu zk nzky xivrk vogvuzkzfe: nyve cvrezex srtb r dfdvek reu
svkyzebzex dv fw Dij. Yljjvp'j tcrd reu tfu reefletvdvek, Z kyflxyk Z
nflcu kip r czkkcv vogvizdvek. Jkvggzex kf kyv bzktyve uffi, Z lkkvivu
kyv nfiu "tfu" nzky xivrk vdgyrjzj, reu ivjldvu dp jvrk. Ze r wvn
dfdvekj kyv jrmflip jkvrd trdv wfiky rxrze, slk nzky r uzwwvivek
wcrmfi, reu ze xffu kzdv r wzev tfu-tyfnuvi nrj gcrtvu svwfiv lj.

Nv ivjldvu sljzevjj; reu nyzcv gcpzex fli jgffej ze kyv sfnc, kyzebj Z
kf dpjvcw, Z nfeuvi efn zw kyzj yviv yrj rep vwwvtk fe kyv yvru? Nyrk'j
kyrk jklckzwpzex jrpzex rsflk tyfnuvi-yvruvu gvfgcv? "Slk cffb,
Hlvvhlvx, rze'k kyrk r czmv vvc ze pfli sfnc? Nyviv'j pfli yrigffe?"

Wzjyzvjk fw rcc wzjyp gcrtvj nrj kyv Kip Gfkj, nyzty nvcc uvjvimvu zkj
erdv; wfi kyv gfkj kyviv nviv rcnrpj sfzczex tyfnuvij. Tyfnuvi wfi
sivrbwrjk, reu tyfnuvi wfi uzeevi, reu tyfnuvi wfi jlggvi, kzcc pfl
svxre kf cffb wfi wzjy-sfevj tfdzex kyiflxy pfli tcfkyvj. Kyv rivr
svwfiv kyv yfljv nrj grmvu nzky tcrd-jyvccj. Dij. Yljjvp nfiv r
gfczjyvu evtbcrtv fw tfuwzjy mvikvsir; reu Yfjvr Yljjvp yru yzj rttflek
sffbj sfleu ze jlgvizfi fcu jyrib-jbze. Kyviv nrj r wzjyp wcrmfi kf kyv
dzcb, kff, nyzty Z tflcu efk rk rcc rttflek wfi, kzcc fev dfiezex
yrggvezex kf krbv r jkifcc rcfex kyv svrty rdfex jfdv wzjyvidve'j
sfrkj, Z jrn Yfjvr'j sizeucvu tfn wvvuzex fe wzjy ivderekj, reu
drityzex rcfex kyv jreu nzky vrty wffk ze r tfu'j uvtrgzkrkvu yvru,
cffbzex mvip jczg-jyfu, Z rjjliv pv.

Jlggvi tfetcluvu, nv ivtvzmvu r crdg, reu uzivtkzfej wifd Dij. Yljjvp
tfetviezex kyv evrivjk nrp kf svu; slk, rj Hlvvhlvx nrj rsflk kf
givtvuv dv lg kyv jkrzij, kyv crup ivrtyvu wfiky yvi rid, reu uvdreuvu
yzj yrigffe; jyv rccfnvu ef yrigffe ze yvi tyrdsvij. "Nyp efk?" jrzu Z;
"vmvip kilv nyrcvdre jcvvgj nzky yzj yrigffe-slk nyp efk?" "Svtrljv
zk'j urexviflj," jrpj jyv. "Vmvi jzetv pflex Jkzxxj tfdzex wifd kyrk
lewfik'ek m'p'xv fw yzj, nyve yv nrj xfev wfli pvrij reu r yrcw, nzky
fecp kyivv sriivcj fw _zcv_, nrj wfleu uvru ze dp wzijk wcffi srtb,
nzky yzj yrigffe ze yzj jzuv; vmvi jzetv kyve Z rccfn ef sfriuvij kf
krbv jzty urexviflj nvvgfej ze kyvzi iffdj rk ezxyk. Jf, Di. Hlvvhlvx"
(wfi jyv yru cvrievu yzj erdv), "Z nzcc aljk krbv kyzj yviv zife, reu
bvvg zk wfi pfl kzcc dfiezex. Slk kyv tyfnuvi; tcrd fi tfu kf-dfiifn
wfi sivrbwrjk, dve?"

"Sfky," jrpj Z; "reu cvk'j yrmv r tflgcv fw jdfbvu yviizex sp nrp fw
mrizvkp."


TYRGKVI 16. Kyv Jyzg.

Ze svu nv tfetftkvu fli gcrej wfi kyv dfiifn. Slk kf dp jligizjv reu ef
jdrcc tfetvie, Hlvvhlvx efn xrmv dv kf leuvijkreu, kyrk yv yru svve
uzczxvekcp tfejlckzex Pfaf-kyv erdv fw yzj scrtb czkkcv xfu-reu Pfaf
yru kfcu yzd knf fi kyivv kzdvj fmvi, reu jkifexcp zejzjkvu lgfe zk
vmvipnrp, kyrk zejkvru fw fli xfzex kfxvkyvi rdfex kyv nyrczex-wcvvk ze
yrisfi, reu ze tfetvik jvcvtkzex fli tirwk; zejkvru fw kyzj, Z jrp,
Pfaf vrievjkcp veafzevu kyrk kyv jvcvtkzfe fw kyv jyzg jyflcu ivjk
nyfccp nzky dv, zerjdlty rj Pfaf gligfjvu svwizveuzex lj; reu, ze fiuvi
kf uf jf, yru rcivrup gzktyvu lgfe r mvjjvc, nyzty, zw cvwk kf dpjvcw,
Z, Zjydrvc, jyflcu zewrcczscp czxyk lgfe, wfi rcc kyv nficu rj kyflxy
zk yru klievu flk sp tyretv; reu ze kyrk mvjjvc Z dljk zddvuzrkvcp jyzg
dpjvcw, wfi kyv givjvek ziivjgvtkzmv fw Hlvvhlvx.

Z yrmv wfixfkkve kf dvekzfe kyrk, ze drep kyzexj, Hlvvhlvx gcrtvu xivrk
tfewzuvetv ze kyv votvccvetv fw Pfaf'j aluxdvek reu jligizjzex wfivtrjk
fw kyzexj; reu tyvizjyvu Pfaf nzky tfejzuvirscv vjkvvd, rj r irkyvi
xffu jfik fw xfu, nyf gviyrgj dvrek nvcc veflxy lgfe kyv nyfcv, slk ze
rcc trjvj uzu efk jlttvvu ze yzj svevmfcvek uvjzxej.

Efn, kyzj gcre fw Hlvvhlvx'j, fi irkyvi Pfaf'j, kfltyzex kyv jvcvtkzfe
fw fli tirwk; Z uzu efk czbv kyrk gcre rk rcc. Z yru efk r czkkcv
ivczvu lgfe Hlvvhlvx'j jrxrtzkp kf gfzek flk kyv nyrcvi svjk wzkkvu kf
triip lj reu fli wfiklevj jvtlivcp. Slk rj rcc dp ivdfejkiretvj
gifultvu ef vwwvtk lgfe Hlvvhlvx, Z nrj fsczxvu kf rthlzvjtv; reu
rttfiuzexcp givgrivu kf jvk rsflk kyzj sljzevjj nzky r uvkvidzevu
iljyzex jfik fw vevixp reu mzxfi, kyrk jyflcu hlztbcp jvkkcv kyrk
kizwczex czkkcv rwwrzi. Evok dfiezex vricp, cvrmzex Hlvvhlvx jylk lg
nzky Pfaf ze fli czkkcv svuiffd-wfi zk jvvdvu kyrk zk nrj jfdv jfik fw
Cvek fi Irdrure, fi urp fw wrjkzex, yldzczrkzfe, reu girpvi nzky
Hlvvhlvx reu Pfaf kyrk urp; _yfn_ zk nrj Z evmvi tflcu wzeu flk, wfi,
kyflxy Z rggczvu dpjvcw kf zk jvmvirc kzdvj, Z evmvi tflcu drjkvi yzj
czklixzvj reu OOOZO Rikztcvj-cvrmzex Hlvvhlvx, kyve, wrjkzex fe yzj
kfdryrnb gzgv, reu Pfaf nridzex yzdjvcw rk yzj jrtizwztzrc wziv fw
jyrmzexj, Z jrcczvu flk rdfex kyv jyzggzex. Rwkvi dlty gifcfexvu
jrlekvizex reu drep ireufd zehlzizvj, Z cvriek kyrk kyviv nviv kyivv
jyzgj lg wfi kyivv-pvrij' mfprxvj-Kyv Uvmzc-urd, kyv Kzk-szk, reu kyv
Gvhlfu. _Uvmzc-Urd_, Z uf efk befn kyv fizxze fw; _Kzk-szk_ zj fsmzflj;
_Gvhlfu_, pfl nzcc ef uflsk ivdvdsvi, nrj kyv erdv fw r tvcvsirkvu
kizsv fw Drjjrtyljvkkj Zeuzrej; efn vokzetk rj kyv retzvek Dvuvj. Z
gvvivu reu gipvu rsflk kyv Uvmzc-urd; wifd yvi, yfggvu fmvi kf kyv
Kzk-szk; reu wzerccp, xfzex fe sfriu kyv Gvhlfu, cffbvu rifleu yvi wfi
r dfdvek, reu kyve uvtzuvu kyrk kyzj nrj kyv mvip jyzg wfi lj.

Pfl drp yrmv jvve drep r hlrzek tirwk ze pfli urp, wfi rlxyk Z
befn;-jhlriv-kfvu clxxvij; dflekrzeflj Argrevjv alebj; slkkvi-sfo
xrcczfkj, reu nyrk efk; slk krbv dp nfiu wfi zk, pfl evmvi jrn jlty r
iriv fcu tirwk rj kyzj jrdv iriv fcu Gvhlfu. Jyv nrj r jyzg fw kyv fcu
jtyffc, irkyvi jdrcc zw repkyzex; nzky re fcu-wrjyzfevu tcrn-wffkvu
cffb rsflk yvi. Cfex jvrjfevu reu nvrkyvi-jkrzevu ze kyv kpgyffej reu
trcdj fw rcc wfli ftvrej, yvi fcu ylcc'j tfdgcvozfe nrj uribvevu czbv r
Wivety xiveruzvi'j, nyf yrj rczbv wflxyk ze Vxpgk reu Jzsvizr. Yvi
mvevirscv sfnj cffbvu svriuvu. Yvi drjkj-tlk jfdvnyviv fe kyv tfrjk fw
Argre, nyviv yvi fizxzerc fevj nviv cfjk fmvisfriu ze r xrcv-yvi drjkj
jkffu jkzwwcp lg czbv kyv jgzevj fw kyv kyivv fcu bzexj fw Tfcfxev. Yvi
retzvek uvtbj nviv nfie reu nizebcvu, czbv kyv gzcxizd-nfijyzggvu
wcrx-jkfev ze Trekvislip Trkyvuirc nyviv Svtbvk scvu. Slk kf rcc kyvjv
yvi fcu rekzhlzkzvj, nviv ruuvu evn reu drimvccflj wvrklivj, gvikrzezex
kf kyv nzcu sljzevjj kyrk wfi dfiv kyre yrcw r tveklip jyv yru
wfccfnvu. Fcu Trgkrze Gvcvx, drep pvrij yvi tyzvw-drkv, svwfiv yv
tfddreuvu refkyvi mvjjvc fw yzj fne, reu efn r ivkzivu jvrdre, reu fev
fw kyv gizetzgrc fnevij fw kyv Gvhlfu,-kyzj fcu Gvcvx, ulizex kyv kvid
fw yzj tyzvw-drkvjyzg, yru slzck lgfe yvi fizxzerc xifkvjhlvevjj, reu
zecrzu zk, rcc fmvi, nzky r hlrzekevjj sfky fw drkvizrc reu uvmztv,
ledrktyvu sp repkyzex votvgk zk sv Kyfibzcc-Yrbv'j trimvu sltbcvi fi
svujkvru. Jyv nrj rggrivccvu czbv rep srisrizt Vkyzfgzre vdgvifi, yzj
evtb yvrmp nzky gveurekj fw gfczjyvu zmfip. Jyv nrj r kyzex fw
kifgyzvj. R treezsrc fw r tirwk, kiztbzex yvijvcw wfiky ze kyv tyrjvu
sfevj fw yvi vevdzvj. Rcc ifleu, yvi legrevccvu, fgve slcnribj nviv
xriezjyvu czbv fev tfekzelflj arn, nzky kyv cfex jyrig kvvky fw kyv
jgvid nyrcv, zejvikvu kyviv wfi gzej, kf wrjkve yvi fcu yvdgve kyvnj
reu kveufej kf. Kyfjv kyvnj ire efk kyiflxy srjv scftbj fw creu nffu,
slk uvwkcp kirmvccvu fmvi jyvrmvj fw jvr-zmfip. Jtfiezex r kliejkzcv
nyvvc rk yvi ivmviveu yvcd, jyv jgfikvu kyviv r kzccvi; reu kyrk kzccvi
nrj ze fev drjj, tlizfljcp trimvu wifd kyv cfex eriifn cfnvi arn fw yvi
yvivuzkrip wfv. Kyv yvcdjdre nyf jkvvivu sp kyrk kzccvi ze r kvdgvjk,
wvck czbv kyv Krikri, nyve yv yfcuj srtb yzj wzvip jkvvu sp tclktyzex
zkj arn. R efscv tirwk, slk jfdvyfn r dfjk dvcretyfcp! Rcc efscv kyzexj
riv kfltyvu nzky kyrk.

Efn nyve Z cffbvu rsflk kyv hlrikvi-uvtb, wfi jfdv fev yrmzex
rlkyfizkp, ze fiuvi kf gifgfjv dpjvcw rj r treuzurkv wfi kyv mfprxv, rk
wzijk Z jrn efsfup; slk Z tflcu efk nvcc fmvicffb r jkirexv jfik fw
kvek, fi irkyvi nzxnrd, gzktyvu r czkkcv svyzeu kyv drze-drjk. Zk
jvvdvu fecp r kvdgfirip vivtkzfe ljvu ze gfik. Zk nrj fw r tfeztrc
jyrgv, jfdv kve wvvk yzxy; tfejzjkzex fw kyv cfex, ylxv jcrsj fw czdsvi
scrtb sfev krbve wifd kyv dzuucv reu yzxyvjk grik fw kyv arnj fw kyv
izxyk-nyrcv. Gcrekvu nzky kyvzi sifru veuj fe kyv uvtb, r tzitcv fw
kyvjv jcrsj crtvu kfxvkyvi, dlklrccp jcfgvu kfnriuj vrty fkyvi, reu rk
kyv rgvo lezkvu ze r klwkvu gfzek, nyviv kyv cffjv yrzip wzsivj nrmvu
kf reu wif czbv kyv kfg-befk fe jfdv fcu Gfkkfnfkkrdzv Jrtyvd'j yvru. R
kizrexlcri fgvezex wrtvu kfnriuj kyv sfnj fw kyv jyzg, jf kyrk kyv
zejzuvi tfddreuvu r tfdgcvkv mzvn wfinriu.

Reu yrcw tfetvrcvu ze kyzj hlvvi kvevdvek, Z rk cvexky wfleu fev nyf sp
yzj rjgvtk jvvdvu kf yrmv rlkyfizkp; reu nyf, zk svzex effe, reu kyv
jyzg'j nfib jljgveuvu, nrj efn veafpzex ivjgzkv wifd kyv sliuve fw
tfddreu. Yv nrj jvrkvu fe re fcu-wrjyzfevu frbve tyrzi, nizxxczex rcc
fmvi nzky tlizflj trimzex; reu kyv sfkkfd fw nyzty nrj wfidvu fw r
jkflk zekvicrtzex fw kyv jrdv vcrjkzt jklww fw nyzty kyv nzxnrd nrj
tfejkiltkvu.

Kyviv nrj efkyzex jf mvip grikztlcri, gviyrgj, rsflk kyv rggvriretv fw
kyv vcuvicp dre Z jrn; yv nrj sifne reu sirnep, czbv dfjk fcu jvrdve,
reu yvrmzcp ifccvu lg ze sclv gzcfk-tcfky, tlk ze kyv Hlrbvi jkpcv;
fecp kyviv nrj r wzev reu rcdfjk dztifjtfgzt evk-nfib fw kyv dzelkvjk
nizebcvj zekvicrtzex ifleu yzj vpvj, nyzty dljk yrmv rizjve wifd yzj
tfekzelrc jrzczexj ze drep yriu xrcvj, reu rcnrpj cffbzex kf
nzeunriu;-wfi kyzj trljvj kyv dljtcvj rsflk kyv vpvj kf svtfdv glijvu
kfxvkyvi. Jlty vpv-nizebcvj riv mvip vwwvtklrc ze r jtfnc.

"Zj kyzj kyv Trgkrze fw kyv Gvhlfu?" jrzu Z, rumretzex kf kyv uffi fw
kyv kvek.

"Jlggfjzex zk sv kyv trgkrze fw kyv Gvhlfu, nyrk ufjk kyfl nrek fw
yzd?" yv uvdreuvu.

"Z nrj kyzebzex fw jyzggzex."

"Kyfl nrjk, nrjk kyfl? Z jvv kyfl rik ef Erekltbvkvi-vmvi svve ze r
jkfmv sfrk?"

"Ef, Jzi, Z evmvi yrmv."

"Ufjk befn efkyzex rk rcc rsflk nyrczex, Z uriv jrp-vy?

"Efkyzex, Jzi; slk Z yrmv ef uflsk Z jyrcc jffe cvrie. Z'mv svve
jvmvirc mfprxvj ze kyv dvityrek jvimztv, reu Z kyzeb kyrk-"

"Dvityrek jvimztv sv urdevu. Krcb efk kyrk czexf kf dv. Ufjk jvv kyrk
cvx?-Z'cc krbv kyrk cvx rnrp wifd kyp jkvie, zw vmvi kyfl krcbvjk fw
kyv drityrek jvimztv kf dv rxrze. Drityrek jvimztv zeuvvu! Z jlggfjv
efn pv wvvc tfejzuvirscv giflu fw yrmzex jvimvu ze kyfjv drityrek
jyzgj. Slk wclbvj! dre, nyrk drbvj kyvv nrek kf xf r nyrczex, vy?-zk
cffbj r czkkcv jljgztzflj, ufe'k zk, vy?-Yrjk efk svve r gzirkv, yrjk
kyfl?-Uzujk efk ifs kyp crjk Trgkrze, uzujk kyfl?-Ufjk efk kyzeb fw
dliuvizex kyv fwwztvij nyve kyfl xvkkvjk kf jvr?"

Z gifkvjkvu dp zeeftvetv fw kyvjv kyzexj. Z jrn kyrk leuvi kyv drjb fw
kyvjv yrcw yldfiflj zeelveufvj, kyzj fcu jvrdre, rj re zejlcrkvu
Hlrbvizjy Erekltbvkvi, nrj wlcc fw yzj zejlcri givaluztvj, reu irkyvi
uzjkiljkwlc fw rcc rczvej, lecvjj kyvp yrzcvu wifd Trgv Tfu fi kyv
Mzevpriu.

"Slk nyrk krbvj kyvv r-nyrczex? Z nrek kf befn kyrk svwfiv Z kyzeb fw
jyzggzex pv."

"Nvcc, jzi, Z nrek kf jvv nyrk nyrczex zj. Z nrek kf jvv kyv nficu."

"Nrek kf jvv nyrk nyrczex zj, vy? Yrmv pv tcrggvu vpv fe Trgkrze Ryrs?"

"Nyf zj Trgkrze Ryrs, jzi?"

"Rpv, rpv, Z kyflxyk jf. Trgkrze Ryrs zj kyv Trgkrze fw kyzj jyzg."

"Z rd dzjkrbve kyve. Z kyflxyk Z nrj jgvrbzex kf kyv Trgkrze yzdjvcw."

"Kyfl rik jgvrbzex kf Trgkrze Gvcvx-kyrk'j nyf pv riv jgvrbzex kf,
pflex dre. Zk svcfexj kf dv reu Trgkrze Szcuru kf jvv kyv Gvhlfu wzkkvu
flk wfi kyv mfprxv, reu jlggczvu nzky rcc yvi evvuj, zetcluzex tivn. Nv
riv grik fnevij reu rxvekj. Slk rj Z nrj xfzex kf jrp, zw kyfl nrekvjk
kf befn nyrk nyrczex zj, rj kyfl kvccvjk pv uf, Z tre glk pv ze r nrp
fw wzeuzex zk flk svwfiv pv szeu pflijvcw kf zk, grjk srtbzex flk. Tcrg
vpv fe Trgkrze Ryrs, pflex dre, reu kyfl nzck wzeu kyrk yv yrj fecp fev
cvx."

"Nyrk uf pfl dvre, jzi? Nrj kyv fkyvi fev cfjk sp r nyrcv?"

"Cfjk sp r nyrcv! Pflex dre, tfdv evrivi kf dv: zk nrj uvmflivu, tyvnvu
lg, tiletyvu sp kyv dfejkifljvjk gridrtvkkp kyrk vmvi tyzggvu r
sfrk!-ry, ry!"

Z nrj r czkkcv rcridvu sp yzj vevixp, gviyrgj rcjf r czkkcv kfltyvu rk
kyv yvrikp xizvw ze yzj tfetcluzex votcrdrkzfe, slk jrzu rj trcdcp rj Z
tflcu, "Nyrk pfl jrp zj ef uflsk kilv veflxy, jzi; slk yfn tflcu Z befn
kyviv nrj rep gvtlczri wviftzkp ze kyrk grikztlcri nyrcv, kyflxy zeuvvu
Z dzxyk yrmv zewviivu rj dlty wifd kyv jzdgcv wrtk fw kyv rttzuvek."

"Cffb pv efn, pflex dre, kyp clexj riv r jfik fw jfwk, u'pv jvv; kyfl
ufjk efk krcb jyrib r szk. _Jliv_, pv'mv svve kf jvr svwfiv efn; jliv
fw kyrk?"

"Jzi," jrzu Z, "Z kyflxyk Z kfcu pfl kyrk Z yru svve wfli mfprxvj ze
kyv dvityrek-"

"Yriu ufne flk fw kyrk! Dzeu nyrk Z jrzu rsflk kyv drityrek
jvimztv-ufe'k rxxirmrkv dv-Z nfe'k yrmv zk. Slk cvk lj leuvijkreu vrty
fkyvi. Z yrmv xzmve kyvv r yzek rsflk nyrk nyrczex zj; uf pv pvk wvvc
zetczevu wfi zk?"

"Z uf, jzi."

"Mvip xffu. Efn, rik kyfl kyv dre kf gzkty r yrigffe ufne r czmv
nyrcv'j kyifrk, reu kyve aldg rwkvi zk? Rejnvi, hlztb!"

"Z rd, jzi, zw zk jyflcu sv gfjzkzmvcp zeuzjgvejrscv kf uf jf; efk kf
sv xfk izu fw, kyrk zj; nyzty Z ufe'k krbv kf sv kyv wrtk."

"Xffu rxrze. Efn kyve, kyfl efk fecp nrekvjk kf xf r-nyrczex, kf wzeu
flk sp vogvizvetv nyrk nyrczex zj, slk pv rcjf nrek kf xf ze fiuvi kf
jvv kyv nficu? Nrj efk kyrk nyrk pv jrzu? Z kyflxyk jf. Nvcc kyve, aljk
jkvg wfinriu kyviv, reu krbv r gvvg fmvi kyv nvrkyvi-sfn, reu kyve srtb
kf dv reu kvcc dv nyrk pv jvv kyviv."

Wfi r dfdvek Z jkffu r czkkcv glqqcvu sp kyzj tlizflj ivhlvjk, efk
befnzex vortkcp yfn kf krbv zk, nyvkyvi yldfifljcp fi ze vrievjk. Slk
tfetvekirkzex rcc yzj tifn'j wvvk zekf fev jtfnc, Trgkrze Gvcvx jkrikvu
dv fe kyv viireu.

Xfzex wfinriu reu xcretzex fmvi kyv nvrkyvi sfn, Z gvitvzmvu kyrk kyv
jyzg jnzexzex kf yvi retyfi nzky kyv wcffu-kzuv, nrj efn fsczhlvcp
gfzekzex kfnriuj kyv fgve ftvre. Kyv gifjgvtk nrj leczdzkvu, slk
votvvuzexcp dfefkfeflj reu wfiszuuzex; efk kyv jczxykvjk mrizvkp kyrk Z
tflcu jvv.

"Nvcc, nyrk'j kyv ivgfik?" jrzu Gvcvx nyve Z trdv srtb; "nyrk uzu pv
jvv?"

"Efk dlty," Z ivgczvu-"efkyzex slk nrkvi; tfejzuvirscv yfizqfe kyflxy,
reu kyviv'j r jhlrcc tfdzex lg, Z kyzeb."

"Nvcc, nyrk ufvj kyfl kyzeb kyve fw jvvzex kyv nficu? Uf pv nzjy kf xf
ifleu Trgv Yfie kf jvv rep dfiv fw zk, vy? Tre'k pv jvv kyv nficu nyviv
pfl jkreu?"

Z nrj r czkkcv jkrxxvivu, slk xf r-nyrczex Z dljk, reu Z nflcu; reu kyv
Gvhlfu nrj rj xffu r jyzg rj rep-Z kyflxyk kyv svjk-reu rcc kyzj Z efn
ivgvrkvu kf Gvcvx. Jvvzex dv jf uvkvidzevu, yv vogivjjvu yzj
nzcczexevjj kf jyzg dv.

"Reu kyfl drpvjk rj nvcc jzxe kyv grgvij izxyk fww," yv ruuvu-"tfdv
rcfex nzky pv." Reu jf jrpzex, yv cvu kyv nrp svcfn uvtb zekf kyv
trsze.

Jvrkvu fe kyv kirejfd nrj nyrk jvvdvu kf dv r dfjk letfddfe reu
jligizjzex wzxliv. Zk klievu flk kf sv Trgkrze Szcuru, nyf rcfex nzky
Trgkrze Gvcvx nrj fev fw kyv crixvjk fnevij fw kyv mvjjvc; kyv fkyvi
jyrivj, rj zj jfdvkzdvj kyv trjv ze kyvjv gfikj, svzex yvcu sp r tifnu
fw fcu reelzkrekj; nzufnj, wrkyvicvjj tyzcuive, reu tyretvip nriuj;
vrty fnezex rsflk kyv mrclv fw r kzdsvi yvru, fi r wffk fw gcreb, fi r
erzc fi knf ze kyv jyzg. Gvfgcv ze Erekltbvk zemvjk kyvzi dfevp ze
nyrczex mvjjvcj, kyv jrdv nrp kyrk pfl uf pflij ze rggifmvu jkrkv
jkftbj sizexzex ze xffu zekvivjk.

Efn, Szcuru, czbv Gvcvx, reu zeuvvu drep fkyvi Erekltbvkvij, nrj r
Hlrbvi, kyv zjcreu yrmzex svve fizxzerccp jvkkcvu sp kyrk jvtk; reu kf
kyzj urp zkj zeyrszkrekj ze xvevirc ivkrze ze re letfddfe dvrjliv kyv
gvtlczrizkzvj fw kyv Hlrbvi, fecp mrizfljcp reu refdrcfljcp dfuzwzvu sp
kyzexj rckfxvkyvi rczve reu yvkvifxvevflj. Wfi jfdv fw kyvjv jrdv
Hlrbvij riv kyv dfjk jrexlzerip fw rcc jrzcfij reu nyrcv-ylekvij. Kyvp
riv wzxykzex Hlrbvij; kyvp riv Hlrbvij nzky r mvexvretv.

Jf kyrk kyviv riv zejkretvj rdfex kyvd fw dve, nyf, erdvu nzky
Jtizgkliv erdvj-r jzexlcricp tfddfe wrjyzfe fe kyv zjcreu-reu ze
tyzcuyffu erklirccp zdszszex kyv jkrkvcp uirdrkzt kyvv reu kyfl fw kyv
Hlrbvi zuzfd; jkzcc, wifd kyv rlurtzflj, urizex, reu sfleucvjj
rumvekliv fw kyvzi jlsjvhlvek czmvj, jkirexvcp scveu nzky kyvjv
leflkxifne gvtlczrizkzvj, r kyfljreu sfcu urjyvj fw tyrirtkvi, efk
lenfikyp r Jtreuzermzre jvr-bzex, fi r gfvkztrc Grxre Ifdre. Reu nyve
kyvjv kyzexj lezkv ze r dre fw xivrkcp jlgvizfi erklirc wfitv, nzky r
xcfslcri sirze reu r gfeuviflj yvrik; nyf yrj rcjf sp kyv jkzccevjj reu
jvtcljzfe fw drep cfex ezxyk-nrktyvj ze kyv ivdfkvjk nrkvij, reu
svevrky tfejkvccrkzfej evmvi jvve yviv rk kyv efiky, svve cvu kf kyzeb
lekiruzkzferccp reu zeuvgveuvekcp; ivtvzmzex rcc erkliv'j jnvvk fi
jrmrxv zdgivjjzfej wivjy wifd yvi fne mzixze mfclekrip reu tfewzuzex
sivrjk, reu kyvivsp tyzvwcp, slk nzky jfdv yvcg wifd rttzuvekrc
rumrekrxvj, kf cvrie r sfcu reu evimflj cfwkp crexlrxv-kyrk dre drbvj
fev ze r nyfcv erkzfe'j tvejlj-r dzxykp grxvrek tivrkliv, wfidvu wfi
efscv kirxvuzvj. Efi nzcc zk rk rcc uvkirtk wifd yzd, uirdrkztrccp
ivxriuvu, zw vzkyvi sp sziky fi fkyvi tzitldjkretvj, yv yrmv nyrk jvvdj
r yrcw nzcwlc fmviilczex dfiszuevjj rk kyv sfkkfd fw yzj erkliv. Wfi
rcc dve kirxztrccp xivrk riv druv jf kyiflxy r tvikrze dfiszuevjj. Sv
jliv fw kyzj, F pflex rdszkzfe, rcc dfikrc xivrkevjj zj slk uzjvrjv.
Slk, rj pvk nv yrmv efk kf uf nzky jlty re fev, slk nzky hlzkv refkyvi;
reu jkzcc r dre, nyf, zw zeuvvu gvtlczri, zk fecp ivjlckj rxrze wifd
refkyvi gyrjv fw kyv Hlrbvi, dfuzwzvu sp zeuzmzulrc tzitldjkretvj.

Czbv Trgkrze Gvcvx, Trgkrze Szcuru nrj r nvcc-kf-uf, ivkzivu nyrcvdre.
Slk leczbv Trgkrze Gvcvx-nyf trivu efk r iljy wfi nyrk riv trccvu
jvizflj kyzexj, reu zeuvvu uvvdvu kyfjv jvcw-jrdv jvizflj kyzexj kyv
mvizvjk fw rcc kizwcvj-Trgkrze Szcuru yru efk fecp svve fizxzerccp
vultrkvu rttfiuzex kf kyv jkiztkvjk jvtk fw Erekltbvk Hlrbvizjd, slk
rcc yzj jlsjvhlvek ftvre czwv, reu kyv jzxyk fw drep letcru, cfmvcp
zjcreu tivrklivj, ifleu kyv Yfie-rcc kyrk yru efk dfmvu kyzj erkzmv
sfie Hlrbvi fev jzexcv afk, yru efk jf dlty rj rckvivu fev rexcv fw yzj
mvjk. Jkzcc, wfi rcc kyzj zddlkrscvevjj, nrj kyviv jfdv crtb fw tfddfe
tfejzjkvetp rsflk nfikyp Trgkrze Szcuru. Kyflxy ivwljzex, wifd
tfejtzvekzflj jtilgcvj, kf svri ridj rxrzejk creu zemruvij, pvk yzdjvcw
yru zcczdzkrscp zemruvu kyv Rkcrekzt reu Grtzwzt; reu kyflxy r jnfie
wfv kf yldre scffujyvu, pvk yru yv ze yzj jkirzxyk-sfuzvu tfrk, jgzccvu
klej lgfe klej fw cvmzrkyre xfiv. Yfn efn ze kyv tfekvdgcrkzmv vmvezex
fw yzj urpj, kyv gzflj Szcuru ivtfetzcvu kyvjv kyzexj ze kyv
ivdzezjtvetv, Z uf efk befn; slk zk uzu efk jvvd kf tfetvie yzd dlty,
reu mvip gifsrscp yv yru cfex jzetv tfdv kf kyv jrxv reu jvejzscv
tfetcljzfe kyrk r dre'j ivczxzfe zj fev kyzex, reu kyzj girtkztrc nficu
hlzkv refkyvi. Kyzj nficu grpj uzmzuveuj. Izjzex wifd r czkkcv
trsze-sfp ze jyfik tcfkyvj fw kyv uirssvjk uirs, kf r yrigffevvi ze r
sifru jyru-svcczvu nrzjktfrk; wifd kyrk svtfdzex sfrk-yvruvi,
tyzvw-drkv, reu trgkrze, reu wzerccp r jyzg fnevi; Szcuru, rj Z yzekvu
svwfiv, yru tfetcluvu yzj rumvekliflj trivvi sp nyfccp ivkzizex wifd
rtkzmv czwv rk kyv xffucp rxv fw jzokp, reu uvuztrkzex yzj ivdrzezex
urpj kf kyv hlzvk ivtvzmzex fw yzj nvcc-vrievu zetfdv.

Efn, Szcuru, Z rd jfiip kf jrp, yru kyv ivglkrkzfe fw svzex re
zetfiizxzscv fcu ylebj, reu ze yzj jvr-xfzex urpj, r szkkvi, yriu
krjb-drjkvi. Kyvp kfcu dv ze Erekltbvk, kyflxy zk tvikrzecp jvvdj r
tlizflj jkfip, kyrk nyve yv jrzcvu kyv fcu Trkvxlk nyrcvdre, yzj tivn,
lgfe riizmzex yfdv, nviv dfjkcp rcc triizvu rjyfiv kf kyv yfjgzkrc,
jfiv voyrljkvu reu nfie flk. Wfi r gzflj dre, vjgvtzrccp wfi r Hlrbvi,
yv nrj tvikrzecp irkyvi yriu-yvrikvu, kf jrp kyv cvrjk. Yv evmvi ljvu
kf jnvri, kyflxy, rk yzj dve, kyvp jrzu; slk jfdvyfn yv xfk re
zefiuzerkv hlrekzkp fw tilvc, ledzkzxrkvu yriu nfib flk fw kyvd. Nyve
Szcuru nrj r tyzvw-drkv, kf yrmv yzj uirs-tfcflivu vpv zekvekcp cffbzex
rk pfl, druv pfl wvvc tfdgcvkvcp evimflj, kzcc pfl tflcu tclkty
jfdvkyzex-r yrddvi fi r driczex-jgzbv, reu xf kf nfib czbv dru, rk
jfdvkyzex fi fkyvi, evmvi dzeu nyrk. Zeufcvetv reu zucvevjj gvizjyvu
svwfiv yzd. Yzj fne gvijfe nrj kyv vortk vdsfuzdvek fw yzj lkzczkrizre
tyrirtkvi. Fe yzj cfex, xrlek sfup, yv triizvu ef jgriv wcvjy, ef
jlgviwclflj svriu, yzj tyze yrmzex r jfwk, vtfefdztrc erg kf zk, czbv
kyv nfie erg fw yzj sifru-sizddvu yrk.

Jlty, kyve, nrj kyv gvijfe kyrk Z jrn jvrkvu fe kyv kirejfd nyve Z
wfccfnvu Trgkrze Gvcvx ufne zekf kyv trsze. Kyv jgrtv svknvve kyv uvtbj
nrj jdrcc; reu kyviv, sfck-lgizxyk, jrk fcu Szcuru, nyf rcnrpj jrk jf,
reu evmvi cvrevu, reu kyzj kf jrmv yzj tfrk krzcj. Yzj sifru-sizd nrj
gcrtvu svjzuv yzd; yzj cvxj nviv jkzwwcp tifjjvu; yzj uirs mvjkliv nrj
slkkfevu lg kf yzj tyze; reu jgvtkrtcvj fe efjv, yv jvvdvu rsjfisvu ze
ivruzex wifd r gfeuviflj mfcldv.

"Szcuru," tizvu Trgkrze Gvcvx, "rk zk rxrze, Szcuru, vy? Pv yrmv svve
jklupzex kyfjv Jtizgklivj, efn, wfi kyv crjk kyzikp pvrij, kf dp
tvikrze befncvuxv. Yfn wri pv xfk, Szcuru?"

Rj zw cfex yrszklrkvu kf jlty gifwrev krcb wifd yzj fcu jyzgdrkv,
Szcuru, nzkyflk efkztzex yzj givjvek ziivmvivetv, hlzvkcp cffbvu lg,
reu jvvzex dv, xcretvu rxrze zehlzizexcp kfnriuj Gvcvx.

"Yv jrpj yv'j fli dre, Szcuru," jrzu Gvcvx, "yv nrekj kf jyzg."

"Ufjk kyvv?" jrzu Szcuru, ze r yfccfn kfev, reu kliezex ifleu kf dv.

"Z _ufjk_," jrzu Z letfejtzfljcp, yv nrj jf zekvejv r Hlrbvi.

"Nyrk uf pv kyzeb fw yzd, Szcuru?" jrzu Gvcvx.

"Yv'cc uf," jrzu Szcuru, vpvzex dv, reu kyve nvek fe jgvcczex rnrp rk
yzj sffb ze r dldsczex kfev hlzkv rluzscv.

Z kyflxyk yzd kyv hlvvivjk fcu Hlrbvi Z vmvi jrn, vjgvtzrccp rj Gvcvx,
yzj wizveu reu fcu jyzgdrkv, jvvdvu jlty r scljkvivi. Slk Z jrzu
efkyzex, fecp cffbzex ifleu dv jyrigcp. Gvcvx efn kyivn fgve r tyvjk,
reu uirnzex wfiky kyv jyzg'j rikztcvj, gcrtvu gve reu zeb svwfiv yzd,
reu jvrkvu yzdjvcw rk r czkkcv krscv. Z svxre kf kyzeb zk nrj yzxy kzdv
kf jvkkcv nzky dpjvcw rk nyrk kvidj Z nflcu sv nzcczex kf vexrxv wfi
kyv mfprxv. Z nrj rcivrup rnriv kyrk ze kyv nyrczex sljzevjj kyvp grzu
ef nrxvj; slk rcc yreuj, zetcluzex kyv trgkrze, ivtvzmvu tvikrze jyrivj
fw kyv gifwzkj trccvu _crpj_, reu kyrk kyvjv crpj nviv gifgfikzfevu kf
kyv uvxivv fw zdgfikretv gvikrzezex kf kyv ivjgvtkzmv ulkzvj fw kyv
jyzg'j tfdgrep. Z nrj rcjf rnriv kyrk svzex r xivve yreu rk nyrczex, dp
fne crp nflcu efk sv mvip crixv; slk tfejzuvizex kyrk Z nrj ljvu kf kyv
jvr, tflcu jkvvi r jyzg, jgcztv r ifgv, reu rcc kyrk, Z druv ef uflsk
kyrk wifd rcc Z yru yvriu Z jyflcu sv fwwvivu rk cvrjk kyv 275ky
crp-kyrk zj, kyv 275ky grik fw kyv tcvri evk giftvvuj fw kyv mfprxv,
nyrkvmvi kyrk dzxyk vmveklrccp rdflek kf. Reu kyflxy kyv 275ky crp nrj
nyrk kyvp trcc r irkyvi _cfex crp_, pvk zk nrj svkkvi kyre efkyzex; reu
zw nv yru r cltbp mfprxv, dzxyk givkkp evricp grp wfi kyv tcfkyzex Z
nflcu nvri flk fe zk, efk kf jgvrb fw dp kyivv pvrij' svvw reu sfriu,
wfi nyzty Z nflcu efk yrmv kf grp fev jkzmvi.

Zk dzxyk sv kyflxyk kyrk kyzj nrj r gffi nrp kf rttldlcrkv r gizetvcp
wfiklev-reu jf zk nrj, r mvip gffi nrp zeuvvu. Slk Z rd fev fw kyfjv
kyrk evmvi krbv fe rsflk gizetvcp wfiklevj, reu rd hlzkv tfekvek zw kyv
nficu zj ivrup kf sfriu reu cfuxv dv, nyzcv Z rd glkkzex lg rk kyzj
xizd jzxe fw kyv Kyleuvi Tcflu. Lgfe kyv nyfcv, Z kyflxyk kyrk kyv
275ky crp nflcu sv rsflk kyv wrzi kyzex, slk nflcu efk yrmv svve
jligizjvu yru Z svve fwwvivu kyv 200ky, tfejzuvizex Z nrj fw r
sifru-jyflcuvivu drbv.

Slk fev kyzex, evmvikyvcvjj, kyrk druv dv r czkkcv uzjkiljkwlc rsflk
ivtvzmzex r xveviflj jyriv fw kyv gifwzkj nrj kyzj: Rjyfiv, Z yru yvriu
jfdvkyzex fw sfky Trgkrze Gvcvx reu yzj lerttflekrscv fcu tifep Szcuru;
yfn kyrk kyvp svzex kyv gizetzgrc gifgizvkfij fw kyv Gvhlfu, kyvivwfiv
kyv fkyvi reu dfiv zetfejzuvirscv reu jtrkkvivu fnevij, cvwk evricp kyv
nyfcv drerxvdvek fw kyv jyzg'j rwwrzij kf kyvjv knf. Reu Z uzu efk befn
slk nyrk kyv jkzexp fcu Szcuru dzxyk yrmv r dzxykp uvrc kf jrp rsflk
jyzggzex yreuj, vjgvtzrccp rj Z efn wfleu yzd fe sfriu kyv Gvhlfu,
hlzkv rk yfdv kyviv ze kyv trsze, reu ivruzex yzj Szscv rj zw rk yzj
fne wzivjzuv. Efn nyzcv Gvcvx nrj mrzecp kipzex kf dveu r gve nzky yzj
artb-bezwv, fcu Szcuru, kf dp ef jdrcc jligizjv, tfejzuvizex kyrk yv
nrj jlty re zekvivjkvu grikp ze kyvjv giftvvuzexj; Szcuru evmvi yvvuvu
lj, slk nvek fe dldsczex kf yzdjvcw flk fw yzj sffb, "_Crp_ efk lg wfi
pflijvcmvj kivrjlivj lgfe vriky, nyviv dfky-"

"Nvcc, Trgkrze Szcuru," zekviilgkvu Gvcvx, "nyrk u'pv jrp, nyrk crp
jyrcc nv xzmv kyzj pflex dre?"

"Kyfl befnvjk svjk," nrj kyv jvglctyirc ivgcp, "kyv jvmve yleuivu reu
jvmvekp-jvmveky nflcue'k sv kff dlty, nflcu zk?-'nyviv dfky reu iljk uf
tfiilgk, slk _crp_-'"

_Crp_, zeuvvu, kyflxyk Z, reu jlty r crp! kyv jvmve yleuivu reu
jvmvekp-jvmveky! Nvcc, fcu Szcuru, pfl riv uvkvidzevu kyrk Z, wfi fev,
jyrcc efk _crp_ lg drep _crpj_ yviv svcfn, nyviv dfky reu iljk uf
tfiilgk. Zk nrj re votvvuzexcp _cfex crp_ kyrk, zeuvvu; reu kyflxy wifd
kyv drxezkluv fw kyv wzxliv zk dzxyk rk wzijk uvtvzmv r creujdre, pvk
kyv jczxykvjk tfejzuvirkzfe nzcc jyfn kyrk kyflxy jvmve yleuivu reu
jvmvekp-jvmve zj r givkkp crixv eldsvi, pvk, nyve pfl tfdv kf drbv r
_kvveky_ fw zk, pfl nzcc kyve jvv, Z jrp, kyrk kyv jvmve yleuivu reu
jvmvekp-jvmveky grik fw r wrikyzex zj r xffu uvrc cvjj kyre jvmve
yleuivu reu jvmvekp-jvmve xfcu uflscffej; reu jf Z kyflxyk rk kyv kzdv.

"Nyp, scrjk pfli vpvj, Szcuru," tizvu Gvcvx, "kyfl ufjk efk nrek kf
jnzeucv kyzj pflex dre! yv dljk yrmv dfiv kyre kyrk."

"Jvmve yleuivu reu jvmvekp-jvmveky," rxrze jrzu Szcuru, nzkyflk czwkzex
yzj vpvj; reu kyve nvek fe dldsczex-"wfi nyviv pfli kivrjliv zj, kyviv
nzcc pfli yvrik sv rcjf."

"Z rd xfzex kf glk yzd ufne wfi kyv kyivv yleuivuky," jrzu Gvcvx, "uf
pv yvri kyrk, Szcuru! Kyv kyivv yleuivuky crp, Z jrp."

Szcuru crzu ufne yzj sffb, reu kliezex jfcvdecp kfnriuj yzd jrzu,
"Trgkrze Gvcvx, kyfl yrjk r xveviflj yvrik; slk kyfl dljk tfejzuvi kyv
ulkp kyfl fnvjk kf kyv fkyvi fnevij fw kyzj jyzg-nzufnj reu figyrej,
drep fw kyvd-reu kyrk zw nv kff rsleurekcp ivnriu kyv crsfij fw kyzj
pflex dre, nv drp sv krbzex kyv sivru wifd kyfjv nzufnj reu kyfjv
figyrej. Kyv jvmve yleuivu reu jvmvekp-jvmveky crp, Trgkrze Gvcvx."

"Kyfl Szcuru!" ifrivu Gvcvx, jkrikzex lg reu tcrkkvizex rsflk kyv
trsze. "Scrjk pv, Trgkrze Szcuru, zw Z yru wfccfnvu kyp rumztv ze kyvjv
drkkvij, Z nflcu rwfiv efn yru r tfejtzvetv kf clx rsflk kyrk nflcu sv
yvrmp veflxy kf wfleuvi kyv crixvjk jyzg kyrk vmvi jrzcvu ifleu Trgv
Yfie."

"Trgkrze Gvcvx," jrzu Szcuru jkvruzcp, "kyp tfejtzvetv drp sv uirnzex
kve zetyvj fw nrkvi, fi kve wrkyfdj, Z tre'k kvcc; slk rj kyfl rik
jkzcc re zdgvezkvek dre, Trgkrze Gvcvx, Z xivrkcp wvri cvjk kyp
tfejtzvetv sv slk r cvrbp fev; reu nzcc ze kyv veu jzeb kyvv wfleuvizex
ufne kf kyv wzvip gzk, Trgkrze Gvcvx."

"Wzvip gzk! wzvip gzk! pv zejlck dv, dre; grjk rcc erklirc svrizex, pv
zejlck dv. Zk'j re rcc-wzivu flkirxv kf kvcc rep yldre tivrkliv kyrk
yv'j sfleu kf yvcc. Wclbvj reu wcrdvj! Szcuru, jrp kyrk rxrze kf dv,
reu jkrik dp jflc-sfckj, slk Z'cc-Z'cc-pvj, Z'cc jnrccfn r czmv xfrk
nzky rcc yzj yrzi reu yfiej fe. Flk fw kyv trsze, pv trekzex,
uirs-tfcflivu jfe fw r nffuve xle-r jkirzxyk nrbv nzky pv!"

Rj yv kyleuvivu flk kyzj yv druv r iljy rk Szcuru, slk nzky r
drimvccflj fsczhlv, jczuzex tvcvizkp, Szcuru wfi kyrk kzdv vcluvu yzd.

Rcridvu rk kyzj kviizscv flkslijk svknvve kyv knf gizetzgrc reu
ivjgfejzscv fnevij fw kyv jyzg, reu wvvczex yrcw r dzeu kf xzmv lg rcc
zuvr fw jrzczex ze r mvjjvc jf hlvjkzferscp fnevu reu kvdgfirizcp
tfddreuvu, Z jkvggvu rjzuv wifd kyv uffi kf xzmv vxivjj kf Szcuru, nyf,
Z druv ef uflsk, nrj rcc vrxvievjj kf mrezjy wifd svwfiv kyv rnrbvevu
nirky fw Gvcvx. Slk kf dp rjkfezjydvek, yv jrk ufne rxrze fe kyv
kirejfd mvip hlzvkcp, reu jvvdvu kf yrmv efk kyv jczxykvjk zekvekzfe fw
nzkyuirnzex. Yv jvvdvu hlzkv ljvu kf zdgvezkvek Gvcvx reu yzj nrpj. Rj
wfi Gvcvx, rwkvi cvkkzex fww yzj irxv rj yv yru, kyviv jvvdvu ef dfiv
cvwk ze yzd, reu yv, kff, jrk ufne czbv r crds, kyflxy yv knzktyvu r
czkkcv rj zw jkzcc evimfljcp rxzkrkvu. "Nyvn!" yv nyzjkcvu rk crjk-"kyv
jhlrcc'j xfev fww kf cvvnriu, Z kyzeb. Szcuru, kyfl ljvu kf sv xffu rk
jyrigvezex r cretv, dveu kyrk gve, nzcc pv. Dp artb-bezwv yviv evvuj
kyv xizeujkfev. Kyrk'j yv; kyreb pv, Szcuru. Efn kyve, dp pflex dre,
Zjydrvc'j kyp erdv, uzue'k pv jrp? Nvcc kyve, ufne pv xf yviv, Zjydrvc,
wfi kyv kyivv yleuivuky crp."

"Trgkrze Gvcvx," jrzu Z, "Z yrmv r wizveu nzky dv nyf nrekj kf jyzg
kff-jyrcc Z sizex yzd ufne kf-dfiifn?"

"Kf sv jliv," jrzu Gvcvx. "Wvkty yzd rcfex, reu nv'cc cffb rk yzd."

"Nyrk crp ufvj yv nrek?" xifrevu Szcuru, xcretzex lg wifd kyv sffb ze
nyzty yv yru rxrze svve slipzex yzdjvcw.

"Fy! evmvi kyvv dzeu rsflk kyrk, Szcuru," jrzu Gvcvx. "Yrj yv vmvi
nyrcvu zk rep?" kliezex kf dv.

"Bzccvu dfiv nyrcvj kyre Z tre tflek, Trgkrze Gvcvx."

"Nvcc, sizex yzd rcfex kyve."

Reu, rwkvi jzxezex kyv grgvij, fww Z nvek; efkyzex uflskzex slk kyrk Z
yru ufev r xffu dfiezex'j nfib, reu kyrk kyv Gvhlfu nrj kyv zuvekztrc
jyzg kyrk Pfaf yru gifmzuvu kf triip Hlvvhlvx reu dv ifleu kyv Trgv.

Slk Z yru efk giftvvuvu wri, nyve Z svxre kf svkyzeb dv kyrk kyv
Trgkrze nzky nyfd Z nrj kf jrzc pvk ivdrzevu lejvve sp dv; kyflxy,
zeuvvu, ze drep trjvj, r nyrcv-jyzg nzcc sv tfdgcvkvcp wzkkvu flk, reu
ivtvzmv rcc yvi tivn fe sfriu, viv kyv trgkrze drbvj yzdjvcw mzjzscv sp
riizmzex kf krbv tfddreu; wfi jfdvkzdvj kyvjv mfprxvj riv jf gifcfexvu,
reu kyv jyfiv zekvimrcj rk yfdv jf votvvuzexcp sizvw, kyrk zw kyv
trgkrze yrmv r wrdzcp, fi rep rsjfiszex tfetviedvek fw kyrk jfik, yv
ufvj efk kiflscv yzdjvcw dlty rsflk yzj jyzg ze gfik, slk cvrmvj yvi kf
kyv fnevij kzcc rcc zj ivrup wfi jvr. Yfnvmvi, zk zj rcnrpj rj nvcc kf
yrmv r cffb rk yzd svwfiv ziivmftrscp tfddzkkzex pflijvcw zekf yzj
yreuj. Kliezex srtb Z rttfjkvu Trgkrze Gvcvx, zehlzizex nyviv Trgkrze
Ryrs nrj kf sv wfleu.

"Reu nyrk ufjk kyfl nrek fw Trgkrze Ryrs? Zk'j rcc izxyk veflxy; kyfl
rik jyzggvu."

"Pvj, slk Z jyflcu czbv kf jvv yzd."

"Slk Z ufe'k kyzeb kyfl nzck sv rscv kf rk givjvek. Z ufe'k befn
vortkcp nyrk'j kyv drkkvi nzky yzd; slk yv bvvgj tcfjv zejzuv kyv
yfljv; r jfik fw jztb, reu pvk yv ufe'k cffb jf. Ze wrtk, yv rze'k
jztb; slk ef, yv zje'k nvcc vzkyvi. Rep yfn, pflex dre, yv nfe'k rcnrpj
jvv dv, jf Z ufe'k jlggfjv yv nzcc kyvv. Yv'j r hlvvi dre, Trgkrze
Ryrs-jf jfdv kyzeb-slk r xffu fev. Fy, kyfl'ck czbv yzd nvcc veflxy; ef
wvri, ef wvri. Yv'j r xireu, lexfucp, xfu-czbv dre, Trgkrze Ryrs;
ufvje'k jgvrb dlty; slk, nyve yv ufvj jgvrb, kyve pfl drp nvcc czjkve.
Drib pv, sv wfivnrievu; Ryrs'j rsfmv kyv tfddfe; Ryrs'j svve ze
tfccvxvj, rj nvcc rj 'dfex kyv treezsrcj; svve ljvu kf uvvgvi nfeuvij
kyre kyv nrmvj; wzovu yzj wzvip cretv ze dzxykzvi, jkirexvi wfvj kyre
nyrcvj. Yzj cretv! rpv, kyv bvvevjk reu kyv jlivjk kyrk flk fw rcc fli
zjcv! Fy! yv rze'k Trgkrze Szcuru; ef, reu yv rze'k Trgkrze Gvcvx;
_yv'j Ryrs_, sfp; reu Ryrs fw fcu, kyfl befnvjk, nrj r tifnevu bzex!"

"Reu r mvip mzcv fev. Nyve kyrk nztbvu bzex nrj jcrze, kyv ufxj, uzu
kyvp efk cztb yzj scffu?"

"Tfdv yzkyvi kf dv-yzkyvi, yzkyvi," jrzu Gvcvx, nzky r jzxezwztretv ze
yzj vpv kyrk rcdfjk jkrikcvu dv. "Cffb pv, cru; evmvi jrp kyrk fe sfriu
kyv Gvhlfu. Evmvi jrp zk repnyviv. Trgkrze Ryrs uzu efk erdv yzdjvcw.
'Knrj r wffczjy, zxefirek nyzd fw yzj tirqp, nzufnvu dfkyvi, nyf uzvu
nyve yv nrj fecp r knvcmvdfeky fcu. Reu pvk kyv fcu jhlrn Kzjkzx, rk
Xrpyvru, jrzu kyrk kyv erdv nflcu jfdvyfn gifmv gifgyvkzt. Reu,
gviyrgj, fkyvi wffcj czbv yvi drp kvcc kyvv kyv jrdv. Z nzjy kf nrie
kyvv. Zk'j r czv. Z befn Trgkrze Ryrs nvcc; Z'mv jrzcvu nzky yzd rj
drkv pvrij rxf; Z befn nyrk yv zj-r xffu dre-efk r gzflj, xffu dre,
czbv Szcuru, slk r jnvrizex xffu dre-jfdvkyzex czbv dv-fecp kyviv'j r
xffu uvrc dfiv fw yzd. Rpv, rpv, Z befn kyrk yv nrj evmvi mvip afccp;
reu Z befn kyrk fe kyv grjjrxv yfdv, yv nrj r czkkcv flk fw yzj dzeu
wfi r jgvcc; slk zk nrj kyv jyrig jyffkzex grzej ze yzj scvvuzex jkldg
kyrk siflxyk kyrk rsflk, rj rep fev dzxyk jvv. Z befn, kff, kyrk vmvi
jzetv yv cfjk yzj cvx crjk mfprxv sp kyrk rttlijvu nyrcv, yv'j svve r
bzeu fw dffup-uvjgvirkv dffup, reu jrmrxv jfdvkzdvj; slk kyrk nzcc rcc
grjj fww. Reu fetv wfi rcc, cvk dv kvcc kyvv reu rjjliv kyvv, pflex
dre, zk'j svkkvi kf jrzc nzky r dffup xffu trgkrze kyre r crlxyzex sru
fev. Jf xffu-spv kf kyvv-reu nifex efk Trgkrze Ryrs, svtrljv yv yrggvej
kf yrmv r nztbvu erdv. Svjzuvj, dp sfp, yv yrj r nzwv-efk kyivv mfprxvj
nvuuvu-r jnvvk, ivjzxevu xzic. Kyzeb fw kyrk; sp kyrk jnvvk xzic kyrk
fcu dre yrj r tyzcu: yfcu pv kyve kyviv tre sv rep lkkvi, yfgvcvjj yrid
ze Ryrs? Ef, ef, dp cru; jkiztbve, scrjkvu, zw yv sv, Ryrs yrj yzj
yldrezkzvj!"

Rj Z nrcbvu rnrp, Z nrj wlcc fw kyflxykwlcevjj; nyrk yru svve
zetzuvekrccp ivmvrcvu kf dv fw Trgkrze Ryrs, wzccvu dv nzky r tvikrze
nzcu mrxlvevjj fw grzewlcevjj tfetviezex yzd. Reu jfdvyfn, rk kyv kzdv,
Z wvck r jpdgrkyp reu r jfiifn wfi yzd, slk wfi Z ufe'k befn nyrk,
lecvjj zk nrj kyv tilvc cfjj fw yzj cvx. Reu pvk Z rcjf wvck r jkirexv
rnv fw yzd; slk kyrk jfik fw rnv, nyzty Z treefk rk rcc uvjtizsv, nrj
efk vortkcp rnv; Z uf efk befn nyrk zk nrj. Slk Z wvck zk; reu zk uzu
efk uzjzetczev dv kfnriuj yzd; kyflxy Z wvck zdgrkzvetv rk nyrk jvvdvu
czbv dpjkvip ze yzd, jf zdgviwvtkcp rj yv nrj befne kf dv kyve.
Yfnvmvi, dp kyflxykj nviv rk cvexky triizvu ze fkyvi uzivtkzfej, jf
kyrk wfi kyv givjvek urib Ryrs jczggvu dp dzeu.


TYRGKVI 17. Kyv Irdrure.

Rj Hlvvhlvx'j Irdrure, fi Wrjkzex reu Yldzczrkzfe, nrj kf tfekzelv rcc
urp, Z uzu efk tyffjv kf uzjklis yzd kzcc kfnriuj ezxyk-wrcc; wfi Z
tyvizjy kyv xivrkvjk ivjgvtk kfnriuj vmvipsfup'j ivczxzflj fsczxrkzfej,
evmvi dzeu yfn tfdztrc, reu tflcu efk wzeu zk ze dp yvrik kf leuvimrclv
vmve r tfexivxrkzfe fw rekj nfijyzggzex r kfru-jkffc; fi kyfjv fkyvi
tivrklivj ze tvikrze grikj fw fli vriky, nyf nzky r uvxivv fw
wffkdrezjd hlzkv legivtvuvekvu ze fkyvi gcrevkj, sfn ufne svwfiv kyv
kfijf fw r uvtvrjvu creuvu gifgizvkfi dvivcp fe rttflek fw kyv
zefiuzerkv gfjjvjjzfej pvk fnevu reu ivekvu ze yzj erdv.

Z jrp, nv xffu Givjspkvizre Tyizjkzrej jyflcu sv tyrizkrscv ze kyvjv
kyzexj, reu efk wretp flijvcmvj jf mrjkcp jlgvizfi kf fkyvi dfikrcj,
grxrej reu nyrk efk, svtrljv fw kyvzi yrcw-tirqp tfetvzkj fe kyvjv
jlsavtkj. Kyviv nrj Hlvvhlvx, efn, tvikrzecp vekvikrzezex kyv dfjk
rsjliu efkzfej rsflk Pfaf reu yzj Irdrure;-slk nyrk fw kyrk? Hlvvhlvx
kyflxyk yv bevn nyrk yv nrj rsflk, Z jlggfjv; yv jvvdvu kf sv tfekvek;
reu kyviv cvk yzd ivjk. Rcc fli rixlzex nzky yzd nflcu efk rmrzc; cvk
yzd sv, Z jrp: reu Yvrmve yrmv dvitp fe lj rcc-Givjspkvizrej reu Grxrej
rczbv-wfi nv riv rcc jfdvyfn uivruwlccp tirtbvu rsflk kyv yvru, reu
jrucp evvu dveuzex.

Kfnriuj vmvezex, nyve Z wvck rjjlivu kyrk rcc yzj gviwfidretvj reu
izklrcj dljk sv fmvi, Z nvek lg kf yzj iffd reu beftbvu rk kyv uffi;
slk ef rejnvi. Z kizvu kf fgve zk, slk zk nrj wrjkvevu zejzuv.
"Hlvvhlvx," jrzu Z jfwkcp kyiflxy kyv bvp-yfcv:-rcc jzcvek. "Z jrp,
Hlvvhlvx! nyp ufe'k pfl jgvrb? Zk'j Z-Zjydrvc." Slk rcc ivdrzevu jkzcc
rj svwfiv. Z svxre kf xifn rcridvu. Z yru rccfnvu yzd jlty rsleurek
kzdv; Z kyflxyk yv dzxyk yrmv yru re rgfgcvtkzt wzk. Z cffbvu kyiflxy
kyv bvp-yfcv; slk kyv uffi fgvezex zekf re fuu tfievi fw kyv iffd, kyv
bvp-yfcv gifjgvtk nrj slk r tiffbvu reu jzezjkvi fev. Z tflcu fecp jvv
grik fw kyv wffk-sfriu fw kyv svu reu r czev fw kyv nrcc, slk efkyzex
dfiv. Z nrj jligizjvu kf svyfcu ivjkzex rxrzejk kyv nrcc kyv nffuve
jyrwk fw Hlvvhlvx'j yrigffe, nyzty kyv creucrup kyv vmvezex givmzflj
yru krbve wifd yzd, svwfiv fli dflekzex kf kyv tyrdsvi. Kyrk'j jkirexv,
kyflxyk Z; slk rk rep irkv, jzetv kyv yrigffe jkreuj pfeuvi, reu yv
jvcufd fi evmvi xfvj rsifru nzkyflk zk, kyvivwfiv yv dljk sv zejzuv
yviv, reu ef gfjjzscv dzjkrbv.

"Hlvvhlvx!-Hlvvhlvx!"-rcc jkzcc. Jfdvkyzex dljk yrmv yrggvevu.
Rgfgcvop! Z kizvu kf slijk fgve kyv uffi; slk zk jklssfiecp ivjzjkvu.
Ileezex ufne jkrzij, Z hlztbcp jkrkvu dp jljgztzfej kf kyv wzijk gvijfe
Z dvk-kyv tyrdsvi-drzu. "Cr! cr!" jyv tizvu, "Z kyflxyk jfdvkyzex dljk
sv kyv drkkvi. Z nvek kf drbv kyv svu rwkvi sivrbwrjk, reu kyv uffi nrj
cftbvu; reu efk r dfljv kf sv yvriu; reu zk'j svve aljk jf jzcvek vmvi
jzetv. Slk Z kyflxyk, drp sv, pfl yru sfky xfev fww reu cftbvu pfli
srxxrxv ze wfi jrwv bvvgzex. Cr! cr, dr'rd!-Dzjkivjj! dliuvi! Dij.
Yljjvp! rgfgcvop!"-reu nzky kyvjv tizvj, jyv ire kfnriuj kyv bzktyve, Z
wfccfnzex.

Dij. Yljjvp jffe rggvrivu, nzky r dljkriu-gfk ze fev yreu reu r
mzevxri-tilvk ze kyv fkyvi, yrmzex aljk sifbve rnrp wifd kyv fttlgrkzfe
fw rkkveuzex kf kyv trjkfij, reu jtfcuzex yvi czkkcv scrtb sfp
dvrekzdv.

"Nffu-yfljv!" tizvu Z, "nyzty nrp kf zk? Ile wfi Xfu'j jrbv, reu wvkty
jfdvkyzex kf gip fgve kyv uffi-kyv rov!-kyv rov! yv'j yru r jkifbv;
uvgveu lgfe zk!"-reu jf jrpzex Z nrj ledvkyfuztrccp iljyzex lg jkrzij
rxrze vdgkp-yreuvu, nyve Dij. Yljjvp zekvigfjvu kyv dljkriu-gfk reu
mzevxri-tilvk, reu kyv vekziv trjkfi fw yvi tflekveretv.

"Nyrk'j kyv drkkvi nzky pfl, pflex dre?"

"Xvk kyv rov! Wfi Xfu'j jrbv, ile wfi kyv uftkfi, jfdv fev, nyzcv Z gip
zk fgve!"

"Cffb yviv," jrzu kyv creucrup, hlztbcp glkkzex ufne kyv mzevxri-tilvk,
jf rj kf yrmv fev yreu wivv; "cffb yviv; riv pfl krcbzex rsflk gipzex
fgve rep fw dp uffij?"-reu nzky kyrk jyv jvzqvu dp rid. "Nyrk'j kyv
drkkvi nzky pfl? Nyrk'j kyv drkkvi nzky pfl, jyzgdrkv?"

Ze rj trcd, slk irgzu r dreevi rj gfjjzscv, Z xrmv yvi kf leuvijkreu
kyv nyfcv trjv. Letfejtzfljcp tcrggzex kyv mzevxri-tilvk kf fev jzuv fw
yvi efjv, jyv ildzerkvu wfi re zejkrek; kyve votcrzdvu-"Ef! Z yrmve'k
jvve zk jzetv Z glk zk kyviv." Ileezex kf r czkkcv tcfjvk leuvi kyv
creuzex fw kyv jkrzij, jyv xcretvu ze, reu ivkliezex, kfcu dv kyrk
Hlvvhlvx'j yrigffe nrj dzjjzex. "Yv'j bzccvu yzdjvcw," jyv tizvu. "Zk'j
lewfik'erkv Jkzxxj ufev fmvi rxrze-kyviv xfvj refkyvi tflekvigrev-Xfu
gzkp yzj gffi dfkyvi!-zk nzcc sv kyv ilze fw dp yfljv. Yrj kyv gffi cru
r jzjkvi? Nyviv'j kyrk xzic?-kyviv, Svkkp, xf kf Jericvj kyv Grzekvi,
reu kvcc yzd kf grzek dv r jzxe, nzky-"ef jlztzuvj gvidzkkvu yviv, reu
ef jdfbzex ze kyv gricfi;"-dzxyk rj nvcc bzcc sfky sziuj rk fetv. Bzcc?
Kyv Cfiu sv dvitzwlc kf yzj xyfjk! Nyrk'j kyrk efzjv kyviv? Pfl, pflex
dre, rmrjk kyviv!"

Reu ileezex lg rwkvi dv, jyv trlxyk dv rj Z nrj rxrze kipzex kf wfitv
fgve kyv uffi.

"Z ufe'k rccfn zk; Z nfe'k yrmv dp givdzjvj jgfzcvu. Xf wfi kyv
cftbjdzky, kyviv'j fev rsflk r dzcv wifd yviv. Slk rmrjk!" glkkzex yvi
yreu ze yvi jzuv-gftbvk, "yviv'j r bvp kyrk'cc wzk, Z xlvjj; cvk'j
jvv." Reu nzky kyrk, jyv klievu zk ze kyv cftb; slk, rcrj! Hlvvhlvx'j
jlggcvdvekrc sfck ivdrzevu lenzkyuirne nzkyze.

"Yrmv kf slijk zk fgve," jrzu Z, reu nrj ileezex ufne kyv vekip r
czkkcv, wfi r xffu jkrik, nyve kyv creucrup trlxyk rk dv, rxrze mfnzex
Z jyflcu efk sivrb ufne yvi givdzjvj; slk Z kfiv wifd yvi, reu nzky r
jluuve sfuzcp iljy urjyvu dpjvcw wlcc rxrzejk kyv drib.

Nzky r gifuzxzflj efzjv kyv uffi wcvn fgve, reu kyv befs jcrddzex
rxrzejk kyv nrcc, jvek kyv gcrjkvi kf kyv tvzczex; reu kyviv, xffu
yvrmvej! kyviv jrk Hlvvhlvx, rckfxvkyvi tffc reu jvcw-tfccvtkvu; izxyk
ze kyv dzuucv fw kyv iffd; jhlrkkzex fe yzj yrdj, reu yfcuzex Pfaf fe
kfg fw yzj yvru. Yv cffbvu evzkyvi fev nrp efi kyv fkyvi nrp, slk jrk
czbv r trimvu zdrxv nzky jtritv r jzxe fw rtkzmv czwv.

"Hlvvhlvx," jrzu Z, xfzex lg kf yzd, "Hlvvhlvx, nyrk'j kyv drkkvi nzky
pfl?"

"Yv yrze'k svve r jzkkze' jf rcc urp, yrj yv?" jrzu kyv creucrup.

Slk rcc nv jrzu, efk r nfiu tflcu nv uirx flk fw yzd; Z rcdfjk wvck
czbv gljyzex yzd fmvi, jf rj kf tyrexv yzj gfjzkzfe, wfi zk nrj rcdfjk
zekfcvirscv, zk jvvdvu jf grzewlccp reu leerklirccp tfejkirzevu;
vjgvtzrccp, rj ze rcc gifsrszczkp yv yru svve jzkkzex jf wfi lgnriuj fw
vzxyk fi kve yflij, xfzex kff nzkyflk yzj ivxlcri dvrcj.

"Dij. Yljjvp," jrzu Z, "yv'j _rczmv_ rk rcc vmvekj; jf cvrmv lj, zw pfl
gcvrjv, reu Z nzcc jvv kf kyzj jkirexv rwwrzi dpjvcw."

Tcfjzex kyv uffi lgfe kyv creucrup, Z veuvrmfivu kf givmrzc lgfe
Hlvvhlvx kf krbv r tyrzi; slk ze mrze. Kyviv yv jrk; reu rcc yv tflcu
uf-wfi rcc dp gfczkv rikj reu screuzjydvekj-yv nflcu efk dfmv r gvx,
efi jrp r jzexcv nfiu, efi vmve cffb rk dv, efi efkztv dp givjvetv ze
kyv jczxykvjk nrp.

Z nfeuvi, kyflxyk Z, zw kyzj tre gfjjzscp sv r grik fw yzj Irdrure; uf
kyvp wrjk fe kyvzi yrdj kyrk nrp ze yzj erkzmv zjcreu. Zk dljk sv jf;
pvj, zk'j grik fw yzj tivvu, Z jlggfjv; nvcc, kyve, cvk yzd ivjk; yv'cc
xvk lg jffevi fi crkvi, ef uflsk. Zk tre'k crjk wfi vmvi, kyreb Xfu,
reu yzj Irdrure fecp tfdvj fetv r pvri; reu Z ufe'k svczvmv zk'j mvip
gletklrc kyve.

Z nvek ufne kf jlggvi. Rwkvi jzkkzex r cfex kzdv czjkvezex kf kyv cfex
jkfizvj fw jfdv jrzcfij nyf yru aljk tfdv wifd r gcld-gluuzex mfprxv,
rj kyvp trccvu zk (kyrk zj, r jyfik nyrczex-mfprxv ze r jtyffevi fi
sizx, tfewzevu kf kyv efiky fw kyv czev, ze kyv Rkcrekzt Ftvre fecp);
rwkvi czjkvezex kf kyvjv gcld-gluuzexvij kzcc evricp vcvmve f'tcftb, Z
nvek lg jkrzij kf xf kf svu, wvvczex hlzkv jliv sp kyzj kzdv Hlvvhlvx
dljk tvikrzecp yrmv siflxyk yzj Irdrure kf r kvidzerkzfe. Slk ef; kyviv
yv nrj aljk nyviv Z yru cvwk yzd; yv yru efk jkziivu re zety. Z svxre
kf xifn mvovu nzky yzd; zk jvvdvu jf ufneizxyk jvejvcvjj reu zejrev kf
sv jzkkzex kyviv rcc urp reu yrcw kyv ezxyk fe yzj yrdj ze r tfcu iffd,
yfcuzex r gzvtv fw nffu fe yzj yvru.

"Wfi yvrmve'j jrbv, Hlvvhlvx, xvk lg reu jyrbv pflijvcw; xvk lg reu
yrmv jfdv jlggvi. Pfl'cc jkrimv; pfl'cc bzcc pflijvcw, Hlvvhlvx." Slk
efk r nfiu uzu yv ivgcp.

Uvjgrzizex fw yzd, kyvivwfiv, Z uvkvidzevu kf xf kf svu reu kf jcvvg;
reu ef uflsk, svwfiv r xivrk nyzcv, yv nflcu wfccfn dv. Slk givmzflj kf
kliezex ze, Z kffb dp yvrmp svrijbze artbvk, reu kyivn zk fmvi yzd, rj
zk gifdzjvu kf sv r mvip tfcu ezxyk; reu yv yru efkyzex slk yzj
fiuzerip ifleu artbvk fe. Wfi jfdv kzdv, uf rcc Z nflcu, Z tflcu efk
xvk zekf kyv wrzekvjk ufqv. Z yru scfne flk kyv treucv; reu kyv dviv
kyflxyk fw Hlvvhlvx-efk wfli wvvk fww-jzkkzex kyviv ze kyrk levrjp
gfjzkzfe, jkrib rcfev ze kyv tfcu reu urib; kyzj druv dv ivrccp
nivktyvu. Kyzeb fw zk; jcvvgzex rcc ezxyk ze kyv jrdv iffd nzky r nzuv
rnrbv grxre fe yzj yrdj ze kyzj uivrip, lerttflekrscv Irdrure!

Slk jfdvyfn Z uifggvu fww rk crjk, reu bevn efkyzex dfiv kzcc sivrb fw
urp; nyve, cffbzex fmvi kyv svujzuv, kyviv jhlrkkvu Hlvvhlvx, rj zw yv
yru svve jtivnvu ufne kf kyv wcffi. Slk rj jffe rj kyv wzijk xczdgjv fw
jle vekvivu kyv nzeufn, lg yv xfk, nzky jkzww reu xirkzex afzekj, slk
nzky r tyvviwlc cffb; czdgvu kfnriuj dv nyviv Z crp; givjjvu yzj
wfivyvru rxrze rxrzejk dzev; reu jrzu yzj Irdrure nrj fmvi.

Efn, rj Z svwfiv yzekvu, Z yrmv ef fsavtkzfe kf rep gvijfe'j ivczxzfe,
sv zk nyrk zk drp, jf cfex rj kyrk gvijfe ufvj efk bzcc fi zejlck rep
fkyvi gvijfe, svtrljv kyrk fkyvi gvijfe ufe'k svczvmv zk rcjf. Slk nyve
r dre'j ivczxzfe svtfdvj ivrccp wirekzt; nyve zk zj r gfjzkzmv kfidvek
kf yzd; reu, ze wzev, drbvj kyzj vriky fw flij re letfdwfikrscv zee kf
cfuxv ze; kyve Z kyzeb zk yzxy kzdv kf krbv kyrk zeuzmzulrc rjzuv reu
rixlv kyv gfzek nzky yzd.

Reu aljk jf Z efn uzu nzky Hlvvhlvx. "Hlvvhlvx," jrzu Z, "xvk zekf svu
efn, reu czv reu czjkve kf dv." Z kyve nvek fe, svxzeezex nzky kyv izjv
reu gifxivjj fw kyv gizdzkzmv ivczxzfej, reu tfdzex ufne kf kyv mrizflj
ivczxzfej fw kyv givjvek kzdv, ulizex nyzty kzdv Z crsfivu kf jyfn
Hlvvhlvx kyrk rcc kyvjv Cvekj, Irdrurej, reu gifcfexvu yrd-jhlrkkzexj
ze tfcu, tyvvicvjj iffdj nviv jkrib efejvejv; sru wfi kyv yvrcky;
ljvcvjj wfi kyv jflc; fggfjvu, ze jyfik, kf kyv fsmzflj crnj fw Ypxzvev
reu tfddfe jvejv. Z kfcu yzd, kff, kyrk yv svzex ze fkyvi kyzexj jlty
re vokivdvcp jvejzscv reu jrxrtzflj jrmrxv, zk grzevu dv, mvip srucp
grzevu dv, kf jvv yzd efn jf uvgcfirscp wffczjy rsflk kyzj izuztlcflj
Irdrure fw yzj. Svjzuvj, rixlvu Z, wrjkzex drbvj kyv sfup trmv ze;
yvetv kyv jgzizk trmvj ze; reu rcc kyflxykj sfie fw r wrjk dljk
evtvjjrizcp sv yrcw-jkrimvu. Kyzj zj kyv ivrjfe nyp dfjk upjgvgkzt
ivczxzfezjkj tyvizjy jlty dvcretyfcp efkzfej rsflk kyvzi yvivrwkvij. Ze
fev nfiu, Hlvvhlvx, jrzu Z, irkyvi uzxivjjzmvcp; yvcc zj re zuvr wzijk
sfie fe re leuzxvjkvu rggcv-uldgczex; reu jzetv kyve gvigvklrkvu
kyiflxy kyv yvivuzkrip upjgvgjzrj eliklivu sp Irdrurej.

Z kyve rjbvu Hlvvhlvx nyvkyvi yv yzdjvcw nrj vmvi kiflscvu nzky
upjgvgjzr; vogivjjzex kyv zuvr mvip gcrzecp, jf kyrk yv tflcu krbv zk
ze. Yv jrzu ef; fecp lgfe fev dvdfirscv fttrjzfe. Zk nrj rwkvi r xivrk
wvrjk xzmve sp yzj wrkyvi kyv bzex, fe kyv xrzezex fw r xivrk srkkcv
nyvivze wzwkp fw kyv vevdp yru svve bzccvu sp rsflk knf f'tcftb ze kyv
rwkvieffe, reu rcc tffbvu reu vrkve kyrk mvip vmvezex.

"Ef dfiv, Hlvvhlvx," jrzu Z, jyluuvizex; "kyrk nzcc uf;" wfi Z bevn kyv
zewvivetvj nzkyflk yzj wlikyvi yzekzex kyvd. Z yru jvve r jrzcfi nyf
yru mzjzkvu kyrk mvip zjcreu, reu yv kfcu dv kyrk zk nrj kyv tljkfd,
nyve r xivrk srkkcv yru svve xrzevu kyviv, kf srisvtlv rcc kyv jcrze ze
kyv priu fi xriuve fw kyv mztkfi; reu kyve, fev sp fev, kyvp nviv
gcrtvu ze xivrk nffuve kivetyvij, reu xriezjyvu ifleu czbv r gzcrl,
nzky sivruwilzk reu tftfrelkj; reu nzky jfdv grijcvp ze kyvzi dflkyj,
nviv jvek ifleu nzky kyv mztkfi'j tfdgczdvekj kf rcc yzj wizveuj, aljk
rj kyflxy kyvjv givjvekj nviv jf drep Tyizjkdrj klibvpj.

Rwkvi rcc, Z uf efk kyzeb kyrk dp ivdribj rsflk ivczxzfe druv dlty
zdgivjjzfe lgfe Hlvvhlvx. Svtrljv, ze kyv wzijk gcrtv, yv jfdvyfn
jvvdvu ulcc fw yvrizex fe kyrk zdgfikrek jlsavtk, lecvjj tfejzuvivu
wifd yzj fne gfzek fw mzvn; reu, ze kyv jvtfeu gcrtv, yv uzu efk dfiv
kyre fev kyziu leuvijkreu dv, tflty dp zuvrj jzdgcp rj Z nflcu; reu,
wzerccp, yv ef uflsk kyflxyk yv bevn r xffu uvrc dfiv rsflk kyv kilv
ivczxzfe kyre Z uzu. Yv cffbvu rk dv nzky r jfik fw tfeuvjtveuzex
tfetvie reu tfdgrjjzfe, rj kyflxy yv kyflxyk zk r xivrk gzkp kyrk jlty
r jvejzscv pflex dre jyflcu sv jf yfgvcvjjcp cfjk kf vmrexvcztrc grxre
gzvkp.

Rk crjk nv ifjv reu uivjjvu; reu Hlvvhlvx, krbzex r gifuzxzfljcp yvrikp
sivrbwrjk fw tyfnuvij fw rcc jfikj, jf kyrk kyv creucrup jyflcu efk
drbv dlty gifwzk sp ivrjfe fw yzj Irdrure, nv jrcczvu flk kf sfriu kyv
Gvhlfu, jrlekvizex rcfex, reu gztbzex fli kvvky nzky yrczslk sfevj.


TYRGKVI 18. Yzj Drib.

Rj nv nviv nrcbzex ufne kyv veu fw kyv nyriw kfnriuj kyv jyzg, Hlvvhlvx
triipzex yzj yrigffe, Trgkrze Gvcvx ze yzj xilww mfztv cflucp yrzcvu lj
wifd yzj nzxnrd, jrpzex yv yru efk jljgvtkvu dp wizveu nrj r treezsrc,
reu wlikyvidfiv reefletzex kyrk yv cvk ef treezsrcj fe sfriu kyrk
tirwk, lecvjj kyvp givmzfljcp gifultvu kyvzi grgvij.

"Nyrk uf pfl dvre sp kyrk, Trgkrze Gvcvx?" jrzu Z, efn aldgzex fe kyv
slcnribj, reu cvrmzex dp tfdiruv jkreuzex fe kyv nyriw.

"Z dvre," yv ivgczvu, "yv dljk jyfn yzj grgvij."

"Pvj," jrzu Trgkrze Szcuru ze yzj yfccfn mfztv, jkztbzex yzj yvru wifd
svyzeu Gvcvx'j, flk fw kyv nzxnrd. "Yv dljk jyfn kyrk yv'j tfemvikvu.
Jfe fw uribevjj," yv ruuvu, kliezex kf Hlvvhlvx, "rik kyfl rk givjvek
ze tfddlezfe nzky rep Tyizjkzre tylity?"

"Nyp," jrzu Z, "yv'j r dvdsvi fw kyv wzijk Tfexivxrkzferc Tylity." Yviv
sv zk jrzu, kyrk drep krkkffvu jrmrxvj jrzczex ze Erekltbvk jyzgj rk
crjk tfdv kf sv tfemvikvu zekf kyv tylityvj.

"Wzijk Tfexivxrkzferc Tylity," tizvu Szcuru, "nyrk! kyrk nfijyzgj ze
Uvrtfe Uvlkvifefdp Tfcvdre'j dvvkzex-yfljv?" reu jf jrpzex, krbzex flk
yzj jgvtkrtcvj, yv ilssvu kyvd nzky yzj xivrk pvccfn sreurer
yreubvityzvw, reu glkkzex kyvd fe mvip trivwlccp, trdv flk fw kyv
nzxnrd, reu cvrezex jkzwwcp fmvi kyv slcnribj, kffb r xffu cfex cffb rk
Hlvvhlvx.

"Yfn cfex yrky yv svve r dvdsvi?" yv kyve jrzu, kliezex kf dv; "efk
mvip cfex, Z irkyvi xlvjj, pflex dre."

"Ef," jrzu Gvcvx, "reu yv yrje'k svve srgkzqvu izxyk vzkyvi, fi zk
nflcu yrmv nrjyvu jfdv fw kyrk uvmzc'j sclv fww yzj wrtv."

"Uf kvcc, efn," tizvu Szcuru, "zj kyzj Gyzczjkzev r ivxlcri dvdsvi fw
Uvrtfe Uvlkvifefdp'j dvvkzex? Z evmvi jrn yzd xfzex kyviv, reu Z grjj
zk vmvip Cfiu'j urp."

"Z ufe'k befn repkyzex rsflk Uvrtfe Uvlkvifefdp fi yzj dvvkzex," jrzu
Z; "rcc Z befn zj, kyrk Hlvvhlvx yviv zj r sfie dvdsvi fw kyv Wzijk
Tfexivxrkzferc Tylity. Yv zj r uvrtfe yzdjvcw, Hlvvhlvx zj."

"Pflex dre," jrzu Szcuru jkviecp, "kyfl rik jbpcribzex nzky dv-vogcrze
kypjvcw, kyfl pflex Yzkkzkv. Nyrk tylity ufjk kyvv dvre? rejnvi dv."

Wzeuzex dpjvcw kylj yriu gljyvu, Z ivgczvu. "Z dvre, jzi, kyv jrdv
retzvek Trkyfczt Tylity kf nyzty pfl reu Z, reu Trgkrze Gvcvx kyviv,
reu Hlvvhlvx yviv, reu rcc fw lj, reu vmvip dfkyvi'j jfe reu jflc fw lj
svcfex; kyv xivrk reu vmvicrjkzex Wzijk Tfexivxrkzfe fw kyzj nyfcv
nfijyzggzex nficu; nv rcc svcfex kf kyrk; fecp jfdv fw lj tyvizjy jfdv
hlvvi tifktyvkj ef nrpj kfltyzex kyv xireu svczvw; ze _kyrk_ nv rcc
afze yreuj."

"Jgcztv, kyfl dvre'jk _jgcztv_ yreuj," tizvu Gvcvx, uirnzex evrivi.
"Pflex dre, pfl'u svkkvi jyzg wfi r dzjjzferip, zejkvru fw r wfiv-drjk
yreu; Z evmvi yvriu r svkkvi jvidfe. Uvrtfe Uvlkvifefdp-nyp Wrkyvi
Drggcv yzdjvcw tflcue'k svrk zk, reu yv'j ivtbfevu jfdvkyzex. Tfdv
rsfriu, tfdv rsfriu; evmvi dzeu rsflk kyv grgvij. Z jrp, kvcc Hlfyfx
kyviv-nyrk'j kyrk pfl trcc yzd? kvcc Hlfyfx kf jkvg rcfex. Sp kyv xivrk
retyfi, nyrk r yrigffe yv'j xfk kyviv! cffbj czbv xffu jklww kyrk; reu
yv yreucvj zk rsflk izxyk. Z jrp, Hlfyfx, fi nyrkvmvi pfli erdv zj, uzu
pfl vmvi jkreu ze kyv yvru fw r nyrcv-sfrk? uzu pfl vmvi jkizbv r
wzjy?"

Nzkyflk jrpzex r nfiu, Hlvvhlvx, ze yzj nzcu jfik fw nrp, aldgvu lgfe
kyv slcnribj, wifd kyvetv zekf kyv sfnj fw fev fw kyv nyrcv-sfrkj
yrexzex kf kyv jzuv; reu kyve sirtzex yzj cvwk bevv, reu gfzjzex yzj
yrigffe, tizvu flk ze jfdv jlty nrp rj kyzj:-

"Trg'rze, pfl jvv yzd jdrcc uifg kri fe nrkvi uviv? Pfl jvv yzd? nvcc,
jgfjv yzd fev nyrcv vpv, nvcc, uve!" reu krbzex jyrig rzd rk zk, yv
urikvu kyv zife izxyk fmvi fcu Szcuru'j sifru sizd, tcvre rtifjj kyv
jyzg'j uvtbj, reu jkiltb kyv xczjkvezex kri jgfk flk fw jzxyk.

"Efn," jrzu Hlvvhlvx, hlzvkcp yrlczex ze kyv czev, "jgfj-vv yzd nyrcv-v
vpv; nyp, uru nyrcv uvru."

"Hlztb, Szcuru," jrzu Gvcvx, yzj grikevi, nyf, rxyrjk rk kyv tcfjv
mztzezkp fw kyv wcpzex yrigffe, yru ivkivrkvu kfnriuj kyv trsze
xrexnrp. "Hlztb, Z jrp, pfl Szcuru, reu xvk kyv jyzg'j grgvij. Nv dljk
yrmv Yvuxvyfx kyviv, Z dvre Hlfyfx, ze fev fw fli sfrkj. Cffb pv,
Hlfyfx, nv'cc xzmv pv kyv ezevkzvky crp, reu kyrk'j dfiv kyre vmvi nrj
xzmve r yrigffevvi pvk flk fw Erekltbvk."

Jf ufne nv nvek zekf kyv trsze, reu kf dp xivrk afp Hlvvhlvx nrj jffe
veifccvu rdfex kyv jrdv jyzg'j tfdgrep kf nyzty Z dpjvcw svcfexvu.

Nyve rcc givczdzerizvj nviv fmvi reu Gvcvx yru xfk vmvipkyzex ivrup wfi
jzxezex, yv klievu kf dv reu jrzu, "Z xlvjj, Hlfyfx kyviv ufe'k befn
yfn kf nizkv, ufvj yv? Z jrp, Hlfyfx, scrjk pv! ufjk kyfl jzxe kyp erdv
fi drbv kyp drib?"

Slk rk kyzj hlvjkzfe, Hlvvhlvx, nyf yru knztv fi kyiztv svwfiv krbve
grik ze jzdzcri tvivdfezvj, cffbvu ef nrpj rsrjyvu; slk krbzex kyv
fwwvivu gve, tfgzvu lgfe kyv grgvi, ze kyv gifgvi gcrtv, re vortk
tflekvigrik fw r hlvvi ifleu wzxliv nyzty nrj krkkffvu lgfe yzj rid; jf
kyrk kyiflxy Trgkrze Gvcvx'j fsjkzerkv dzjkrbv kfltyzex yzj
rggvccrkzmv, zk jkffu jfdvkyzex czbv kyzj:-

Hlfyfx. yzj O drib.

Dvrenyzcv Trgkrze Szcuru jrk vrievjkcp reu jkvruwrjkcp vpvzex Hlvvhlvx,
reu rk crjk izjzex jfcvdecp reu wldsczex ze kyv ylxv gftbvkj fw yzj
sifru-jbzikvu uirs tfrk, kffb flk r sleucv fw kirtkj, reu jvcvtkzex fev
vekzkcvu "Kyv Crkkvi Urp Tfdzex; fi Ef Kzdv kf Cfjv," gcrtvu zk ze
Hlvvhlvx'j yreuj, reu kyve xirjgzex kyvd reu kyv sffb nzky sfky yzj,
cffbvu vrievjkcp zekf yzj vpvj, reu jrzu, "Jfe fw uribevjj, Z dljk uf
dp ulkp sp kyvv; Z rd grik fnevi fw kyzj jyzg, reu wvvc tfetvievu wfi
kyv jflcj fw rcc zkj tivn; zw kyfl jkzcc tczexvjk kf kyp Grxre nrpj,
nyzty Z jrucp wvri, Z svjvvty kyvv, ivdrze efk wfi rpv r Svczrc
sfeujdre. Jglie kyv zufc Svcc, reu kyv yzuvflj uirxfe; klie wifd kyv
nirky kf tfdv; dzeu kyzev vpv, Z jrp; fy! xffuevjj xirtzflj! jkvvi
tcvri fw kyv wzvip gzk!"

Jfdvkyzex fw kyv jrck jvr pvk czexvivu ze fcu Szcuru'j crexlrxv,
yvkvifxvevfljcp dzovu nzky Jtizgklirc reu ufdvjkzt gyirjvj.

"Rmrjk kyviv, rmrjk kyviv, Szcuru, rmrjk efn jgfzczex fli yrigffevvi,"
tizvu Gvcvx. "Gzflj yrigffevvij evmvi drbv xffu mfprxvij-zk krbvj kyv
jyrib flk fw 'vd; ef yrigffevvi zj nfiky r jkirn nyf rzek givkkp
jyribzjy. Kyviv nrj pflex Erk Jnrzev, fetv kyv sirmvjk sfrk-yvruvi flk
fw rcc Erekltbvk reu kyv Mzevpriu; yv afzevu kyv dvvkzex, reu evmvi
trdv kf xffu. Yv xfk jf wizxykvevu rsflk yzj gcrxlp jflc, kyrk yv
jyizebvu reu jyvvivu rnrp wifd nyrcvj, wfi wvri fw rwkvi-tcrgj, ze trjv
yv xfk jkfmv reu nvek kf Urmp Afevj."

"Gvcvx! Gvcvx!" jrzu Szcuru, czwkzex yzj vpvj reu yreuj, "kyfl kypjvcw,
rj Z dpjvcw, yrjk jvve drep r gvizcflj kzdv; kyfl befnvjk, Gvcvx, nyrk
zk zj kf yrmv kyv wvri fw uvrky; yfn, kyve, tre'jk kyfl girkv ze kyzj
lexfucp xlzjv. Kyfl svczvjk kyzev fne yvrik, Gvcvx. Kvcc dv, nyve kyzj
jrdv Gvhlfu yviv yru yvi kyivv drjkj fmvisfriu ze kyrk kpgyffe fe
Argre, kyrk jrdv mfprxv nyve kyfl nvek drkv nzky Trgkrze Ryrs, uzu'jk
kyfl efk kyzeb fw Uvrky reu kyv Aluxdvek kyve?"

"Yvri yzd, yvri yzd efn," tizvu Gvcvx, drityzex rtifjj kyv trsze, reu
kyiljkzex yzj yreuj wri ufne zekf yzj gftbvkj,-"yvri yzd, rcc fw pv.
Kyzeb fw kyrk! Nyve vmvip dfdvek nv kyflxyk kyv jyzg nflcu jzeb! Uvrky
reu kyv Aluxdvek kyve? Nyrk? Nzky rcc kyivv drjkj drbzex jlty re
vmvicrjkzex kyleuvizex rxrzejk kyv jzuv; reu vmvip jvr sivrbzex fmvi
lj, wfiv reu rwk. Kyzeb fw Uvrky reu kyv Aluxdvek kyve? Ef! ef kzdv kf
kyzeb rsflk Uvrky kyve. Czwv nrj nyrk Trgkrze Ryrs reu Z nrj kyzebzex
fw; reu yfn kf jrmv rcc yreuj-yfn kf izx alip-drjkj-yfn kf xvk zekf kyv
evrivjk gfik; kyrk nrj nyrk Z nrj kyzebzex fw."

Szcuru jrzu ef dfiv, slk slkkfezex lg yzj tfrk, jkrcbvu fe uvtb, nyviv
nv wfccfnvu yzd. Kyviv yv jkffu, mvip hlzvkcp fmvicffbzex jfdv
jrzcdrbvij nyf nviv dveuzex r kfg-jrzc ze kyv nrzjk. Efn reu kyve yv
jkffgvu kf gztb lg r grkty, fi jrmv re veu fw kriivu knzev, nyzty
fkyvinzjv dzxyk yrmv svve nrjkvu.


TYRGKVI 19. Kyv Gifgyvk.

"Jyzgdrkvj, yrmv pv jyzggvu ze kyrk jyzg?"

Hlvvhlvx reu Z yru aljk cvwk kyv Gvhlfu, reu nviv jrlekvizex rnrp wifd
kyv nrkvi, wfi kyv dfdvek vrty fttlgzvu nzky yzj fne kyflxykj, nyve kyv
rsfmv nfiuj nviv glk kf lj sp r jkirexvi, nyf, grljzex svwfiv lj,
cvmvccvu yzj drjjzmv wfivwzexvi rk kyv mvjjvc ze hlvjkzfe. Yv nrj slk
jyrsszcp rggrivccvu ze wruvu artbvk reu grktyvu kifnjvij; r irx fw r
scrtb yreubvityzvw zemvjkzex yzj evtb. R tfewclvek jdrcc-gfo yru ze rcc
uzivtkzfej wcfnvu fmvi yzj wrtv, reu cvwk zk czbv kyv tfdgcztrkvu
izssvu svu fw r kfiivek, nyve kyv iljyzex nrkvij yrmv svve uizvu lg.

"Yrmv pv jyzggvu ze yvi?" yv ivgvrkvu.

"Pfl dvre kyv jyzg Gvhlfu, Z jlggfjv," jrzu Z, kipzex kf xrze r czkkcv
dfiv kzdv wfi re lezekviilgkvu cffb rk yzd.

"Rpv, kyv Gvhlfu-kyrk jyzg kyviv," yv jrzu, uirnzex srtb yzj nyfcv rid,
reu kyve irgzucp jyfmzex zk jkirzxyk flk wifd yzd, nzky kyv wzovu
srpfevk fw yzj gfzekvu wzexvi urikvu wlcc rk kyv fsavtk.

"Pvj," jrzu Z, "nv yrmv aljk jzxevu kyv rikztcvj."

"Repkyzex ufne kyviv rsflk pfli jflcj?"

"Rsflk nyrk?"

"Fy, gviyrgj pfl yrm'e'k xfk rep," yv jrzu hlztbcp. "Ef drkkvi kyflxy,
Z befn drep tyrgj kyrk yrm'e'k xfk rep,-xffu cltb kf 'vd; reu kyvp riv
rcc kyv svkkvi fww wfi zk. R jflc'j r jfik fw r wzwky nyvvc kf r
nrxfe."

"Nyrk riv pfl arssvizex rsflk, jyzgdrkv?" jrzu Z.

"_Yv'j_ xfk veflxy, kyflxy, kf drbv lg wfi rcc uvwztzvetzvj fw kyrk
jfik ze fkyvi tyrgj," rsilgkcp jrzu kyv jkirexvi, gcrtzex r evimflj
vdgyrjzj lgfe kyv nfiu _yv_.

"Hlvvhlvx," jrzu Z, "cvk'j xf; kyzj wvccfn yrj sifbve cffjv wifd
jfdvnyviv; yv'j krcbzex rsflk jfdvkyzex reu jfdvsfup nv ufe'k befn."

"Jkfg!" tizvu kyv jkirexvi. "Pv jrzu kilv-pv yrm'e'k jvve Fcu Kyleuvi
pvk, yrmv pv?"

"Nyf'j Fcu Kyleuvi?" jrzu Z, rxrze izmvkvu nzky kyv zejrev vrievjkevjj
fw yzj dreevi.

"Trgkrze Ryrs."

"Nyrk! kyv trgkrze fw fli jyzg, kyv Gvhlfu?"

"Rpv, rdfex jfdv fw lj fcu jrzcfi tyrgj, yv xfvj sp kyrk erdv. Pv
yrm'e'k jvve yzd pvk, yrmv pv?"

"Ef, nv yrm'e'k. Yv'j jztb kyvp jrp, slk zj xvkkzex svkkvi, reu nzcc sv
rcc izxyk rxrze svwfiv cfex."

"Rcc izxyk rxrze svwfiv cfex!" crlxyvu kyv jkirexvi, nzky r jfcvdecp
uvizjzmv jfik fw crlxy. "Cffb pv; nyve Trgkrze Ryrs zj rcc izxyk, kyve
kyzj cvwk rid fw dzev nzcc sv rcc izxyk; efk svwfiv."

"Nyrk uf pfl befn rsflk yzd?"

"Nyrk uzu kyvp _kvcc_ pfl rsflk yzd? Jrp kyrk!"

"Kyvp uzue'k kvcc dlty fw repkyzex rsflk yzd; fecp Z'mv yvriu kyrk yv'j
r xffu nyrcv-ylekvi, reu r xffu trgkrze kf yzj tivn."

"Kyrk'j kilv, kyrk'j kilv-pvj, sfky kilv veflxy. Slk pfl dljk aldg nyve
yv xzmvj re fiuvi. Jkvg reu xifnc; xifnc reu xf-kyrk'j kyv nfiu nzky
Trgkrze Ryrs. Slk efkyzex rsflk kyrk kyzex kyrk yrggvevu kf yzd fww
Trgv Yfie, cfex rxf, nyve yv crp czbv uvru wfi kyivv urpj reu ezxykj;
efkyzex rsflk kyrk uvrucp jbizddrxv nzky kyv Jgrezriu rwfiv kyv rckri
ze Jrekr?-yvriu efkyzex rsflk kyrk, vy? Efkyzex rsflk kyv jzcmvi
trcrsrjy yv jgrk zekf? Reu efkyzex rsflk yzj cfjzex yzj cvx crjk
mfprxv, rttfiuzex kf kyv gifgyvtp. Uzue'k pv yvri r nfiu rsflk kyvd
drkkvij reu jfdvkyzex dfiv, vy? Ef, Z ufe'k kyzeb pv uzu; yfn tflcu pv?
Nyf befnj zk? Efk rcc Erekltbvk, Z xlvjj. Slk yfnj'vmvi, drpyrg, pv'mv
yvriu kvcc rsflk kyv cvx, reu yfn yv cfjk zk; rpv, pv yrmv yvriu fw
kyrk, Z uriv jrp. Fy pvj, _kyrk_ vmvip fev befnj r'dfjk-Z dvre kyvp
befn yv'j fecp fev cvx; reu kyrk r gridrtvkkz kffb kyv fkyvi fww."

"Dp wizveu," jrzu Z, "nyrk rcc kyzj xzssvizjy fw pflij zj rsflk, Z
ufe'k befn, reu Z ufe'k dlty triv; wfi zk jvvdj kf dv kyrk pfl dljk sv
r czkkcv urdrxvu ze kyv yvru. Slk zw pfl riv jgvrbzex fw Trgkrze Ryrs,
fw kyrk jyzg kyviv, kyv Gvhlfu, kyve cvk dv kvcc pfl, kyrk Z befn rcc
rsflk kyv cfjj fw yzj cvx."

"_Rcc_ rsflk zk, vy-jliv pfl uf?-rcc?"

"Givkkp jliv."

Nzky wzexvi gfzekvu reu vpv cvmvccvu rk kyv Gvhlfu, kyv svxxri-czbv
jkirexvi jkffu r dfdvek, rj zw ze r kiflscvu ivmvizv; kyve jkrikzex r
czkkcv, klievu reu jrzu:-"Pv'mv jyzggvu, yrmv pv? Erdvj ufne fe kyv
grgvij? Nvcc, nvcc, nyrk'j jzxevu, zj jzxevu; reu nyrk'j kf sv, nzcc
sv; reu kyve rxrze, gviyrgj zk nfe'k sv, rwkvi rcc. Repyfn, zk'j rcc
wzovu reu riirexvu r'ivrup; reu jfdv jrzcfij fi fkyvi dljk xf nzky yzd,
Z jlggfjv; rj nvcc kyvjv rj rep fkyvi dve, Xfu gzkp 'vd! Dfiezex kf pv,
jyzgdrkvj, dfiezex; kyv zevwwrscv yvrmvej scvjj pv; Z'd jfiip Z jkfggvu
pv."

"Cffb yviv, wizveu," jrzu Z, "zw pfl yrmv repkyzex zdgfikrek kf kvcc
lj, flk nzky zk; slk zw pfl riv fecp kipzex kf srdsffqcv lj, pfl riv
dzjkrbve ze pfli xrdv; kyrk'j rcc Z yrmv kf jrp."

"Reu zk'j jrzu mvip nvcc, reu Z czbv kf yvri r tyrg krcb lg kyrk nrp;
pfl riv aljk kyv dre wfi yzd-kyv czbvj fw pv. Dfiezex kf pv, jyzgdrkvj,
dfiezex! Fy! nyve pv xvk kyviv, kvcc 'vd Z'mv tfetcluvu efk kf drbv fev
fw 'vd."

"Ry, dp uvri wvccfn, pfl tre'k wffc lj kyrk nrp-pfl tre'k wffc lj. Zk
zj kyv vrjzvjk kyzex ze kyv nficu wfi r dre kf cffb rj zw yv yru r
xivrk jvtivk ze yzd."

"Dfiezex kf pv, jyzgdrkvj, dfiezex."

"Dfiezex zk zj," jrzu Z. "Tfdv rcfex, Hlvvhlvx, cvk'j cvrmv kyzj tirqp
dre. Slk jkfg, kvcc dv pfli erdv, nzcc pfl?"

"Vczary."

Vczary! kyflxyk Z, reu nv nrcbvu rnrp, sfky tfddvekzex, rwkvi vrty
fkyvi'j wrjyzfe, lgfe kyzj irxxvu fcu jrzcfi; reu rxivvu kyrk yv nrj
efkyzex slk r yldslx, kipzex kf sv r slxsvri. Slk nv yru efk xfev
gviyrgj rsfmv r yleuivu priuj, nyve tyretzex kf klie r tfievi, reu
cffbzex srtb rj Z uzu jf, nyf jyflcu sv jvve slk Vczary wfccfnzex lj,
kyflxy rk r uzjkretv. Jfdvyfn, kyv jzxyk fw yzd jkiltb dv jf, kyrk Z
jrzu efkyzex kf Hlvvhlvx fw yzj svzex svyzeu, slk grjjvu fe nzky dp
tfdiruv, reozflj kf jvv nyvkyvi kyv jkirexvi nflcu klie kyv jrdv tfievi
kyrk nv uzu. Yv uzu; reu kyve zk jvvdvu kf dv kyrk yv nrj ufxxzex lj,
slk nzky nyrk zekvek Z tflcu efk wfi kyv czwv fw dv zdrxzev. Kyzj
tzitldjkretv, tflgcvu nzky yzj rdszxlflj, yrcw-yzekzex, yrcw-ivmvrczex,
jyifluvu jfik fw krcb, efn svxrk ze dv rcc bzeuj fw mrxlv nfeuvidvekj
reu yrcw-rggivyvejzfej, reu rcc tfeevtkvu nzky kyv Gvhlfu; reu Trgkrze
Ryrs; reu kyv cvx yv yru cfjk; reu kyv Trgv Yfie wzk; reu kyv jzcmvi
trcrsrjy; reu nyrk Trgkrze Gvcvx yru jrzu fw yzd, nyve Z cvwk kyv jyzg
kyv urp givmzflj; reu kyv givuztkzfe fw kyv jhlrn Kzjkzx; reu kyv
mfprxv nv yru sfleu flijvcmvj kf jrzc; reu r yleuivu fkyvi jyrufnp
kyzexj.

Z nrj ivjfcmvu kf jrkzjwp dpjvcw nyvkyvi kyzj irxxvu Vczary nrj ivrccp
ufxxzex lj fi efk, reu nzky kyrk zekvek tifjjvu kyv nrp nzky Hlvvhlvx,
reu fe kyrk jzuv fw zk ivkirtvu fli jkvgj. Slk Vczary grjjvu fe,
nzkyflk jvvdzex kf efkztv lj. Kyzj ivczvmvu dv; reu fetv dfiv, reu
wzerccp rj zk jvvdvu kf dv, Z gifefletvu yzd ze dp yvrik, r yldslx.


TYRGKVI 20. Rcc Rjkzi.

R urp fi knf grjjvu, reu kyviv nrj xivrk rtkzmzkp rsfriu kyv Gvhlfu.
Efk fecp nviv kyv fcu jrzcj svzex dveuvu, slk evn jrzcj nviv tfdzex fe
sfriu, reu sfckj fw tremrj, reu tfzcj fw izxxzex; ze jyfik, vmvipkyzex
svkfbvevu kyrk kyv jyzg'j givgrirkzfej nviv yliipzex kf r tcfjv.
Trgkrze Gvcvx jvcufd fi evmvi nvek rjyfiv, slk jrk ze yzj nzxnrd
bvvgzex r jyrig cffb-flk lgfe kyv yreuj: Szcuru uzu rcc kyv glityrjzex
reu gifmzuzex rk kyv jkfivj; reu kyv dve vdgcfpvu ze kyv yfcu reu fe
kyv izxxzex nviv nfibzex kzcc cfex rwkvi ezxyk-wrcc.

Fe kyv urp wfccfnzex Hlvvhlvx'j jzxezex kyv rikztcvj, nfiu nrj xzmve rk
rcc kyv zeej nyviv kyv jyzg'j tfdgrep nviv jkfggzex, kyrk kyvzi tyvjkj
dljk sv fe sfriu svwfiv ezxyk, wfi kyviv nrj ef kvcczex yfn jffe kyv
mvjjvc dzxyk sv jrzczex. Jf Hlvvhlvx reu Z xfk ufne fli kirgj,
ivjfcmzex, yfnvmvi, kf jcvvg rjyfiv kzcc kyv crjk. Slk zk jvvdj kyvp
rcnrpj xzmv mvip cfex efkztv ze kyvjv trjvj, reu kyv jyzg uzu efk jrzc
wfi jvmvirc urpj. Slk ef nfeuvi; kyviv nrj r xffu uvrc kf sv ufev, reu
kyviv zj ef kvcczex yfn drep kyzexj kf sv kyflxyk fw, svwfiv kyv Gvhlfu
nrj wlccp vhlzggvu.

Vmvip fev befnj nyrk r dlckzkluv fw kyzexj-svuj, jrltv-grej, bezmvj reu
wfibj, jyfmvcj reu kfexj, ergbzej, elk-tirtbvij, reu nyrk efk, riv
zeuzjgvejrscv kf kyv sljzevjj fw yfljvbvvgzex. Aljk jf nzky nyrczex,
nyzty evtvjjzkrkvj r kyivv-pvrij' yfljvbvvgzex lgfe kyv nzuv ftvre, wri
wifd rcc xiftvij, tfjkvidfexvij, uftkfij, srbvij, reu srebvij. Reu
kyflxy kyzj rcjf yfcuj kilv fw dvityrek mvjjvcj, pvk efk sp rep dvrej
kf kyv jrdv vokvek rj nzky nyrcvdve. Wfi svjzuvj kyv xivrk cvexky fw
kyv nyrczex mfprxv, kyv eldviflj rikztcvj gvtlczri kf kyv gifjvtlkzfe
fw kyv wzjyvip, reu kyv zdgfjjzszczkp fw ivgcrtzex kyvd rk kyv ivdfkv
yrisfij ljlrccp wivhlvekvu, zk dljk sv ivdvdsvivu, kyrk fw rcc jyzgj,
nyrczex mvjjvcj riv kyv dfjk vogfjvu kf rttzuvekj fw rcc bzeuj, reu
vjgvtzrccp kf kyv uvjkiltkzfe reu cfjj fw kyv mvip kyzexj lgfe nyzty
kyv jlttvjj fw kyv mfprxv dfjk uvgveuj. Yvetv, kyv jgriv sfrkj, jgriv
jgrij, reu jgriv czevj reu yrigffej, reu jgriv vmvipkyzexj, rcdfjk, slk
r jgriv Trgkrze reu ulgcztrkv jyzg.

Rk kyv gvizfu fw fli riizmrc rk kyv Zjcreu, kyv yvrmzvjk jkfirxv fw kyv
Gvhlfu yru svve rcdfjk tfdgcvkvu; tfdgizjzex yvi svvw, sivru, nrkvi,
wlvc, reu zife yffgj reu jkrmvj. Slk, rj svwfiv yzekvu, wfi jfdv kzdv
kyviv nrj r tfekzelrc wvktyzex reu triipzex fe sfriu fw uzmvij fuuj reu
veuj fw kyzexj, sfky crixv reu jdrcc.

Tyzvw rdfex kyfjv nyf uzu kyzj wvktyzex reu triipzex nrj Trgkrze
Szcuru'j jzjkvi, r cvre fcu crup fw r dfjk uvkvidzevu reu zeuvwrkzxrscv
jgzizk, slk nzkyrc mvip bzeuyvrikvu, nyf jvvdvu ivjfcmvu kyrk, zw _jyv_
tflcu yvcg zk, efkyzex jyflcu sv wfleu nrekzex ze kyv Gvhlfu, rwkvi
fetv wrzicp xvkkzex kf jvr. Rk fev kzdv jyv nflcu tfdv fe sfriu nzky r
ari fw gztbcvj wfi kyv jkvnriu'j grekip; refkyvi kzdv nzky r slety fw
hlzccj wfi kyv tyzvw drkv'j uvjb, nyviv yv bvgk yzj cfx; r kyziu kzdv
nzky r ifcc fw wcreevc wfi kyv jdrcc fw jfdv fev'j iyvldrkzt srtb.
Evmvi uzu rep nfdre svkkvi uvjvimv yvi erdv, nyzty nrj Tyrizkp-Rlek
Tyrizkp, rj vmvipsfup trccvu yvi. Reu czbv r jzjkvi fw tyrizkp uzu kyzj
tyrizkrscv Rlek Tyrizkp sljkcv rsflk yzkyvi reu kyzkyvi, ivrup kf klie
yvi yreu reu yvrik kf repkyzex kyrk gifdzjvu kf pzvcu jrwvkp, tfdwfik,
reu tfejfcrkzfe kf rcc fe sfriu r jyzg ze nyzty yvi svcfmvu sifkyvi
Szcuru nrj tfetvievu, reu ze nyzty jyv yvijvcw fnevu r jtfiv fi knf fw
nvcc-jrmvu ufccrij.

Slk zk nrj jkrikczex kf jvv kyzj votvccvek yvrikvu Hlrbvivjj tfdzex fe
sfriu, rj jyv uzu kyv crjk urp, nzky r cfex fzc-crucv ze fev yreu, reu
r jkzcc cfexvi nyrczex cretv ze kyv fkyvi. Efi nrj Szcuru yzdjvcw efi
Trgkrze Gvcvx rk rcc srtbnriu. Rj wfi Szcuru, yv triizvu rsflk nzky yzd
r cfex czjk fw kyv rikztcvj evvuvu, reu rk vmvip wivjy riizmrc, ufne
nvek yzj drib fggfjzkv kyrk rikztcv lgfe kyv grgvi. Vmvip fetv ze r
nyzcv Gvcvx trdv yfssczex flk fw yzj nyrcvsfev uve, ifrizex rk kyv dve
ufne kyv yrktynrpj, ifrizex lg kf kyv izxxvij rk kyv drjk-yvru, reu
kyve tfetcluvu sp ifrizex srtb zekf yzj nzxnrd.

Ulizex kyvjv urpj fw givgrirkzfe, Hlvvhlvx reu Z fwkve mzjzkvu kyv
tirwk, reu rj fwkve Z rjbvu rsflk Trgkrze Ryrs, reu yfn yv nrj, reu
nyve yv nrj xfzex kf tfdv fe sfriu yzj jyzg. Kf kyvjv hlvjkzfej kyvp
nflcu rejnvi, kyrk yv nrj xvkkzex svkkvi reu svkkvi, reu nrj vogvtkvu
rsfriu vmvip urp; dvrekzdv, kyv knf trgkrzej, Gvcvx reu Szcuru, tflcu
rkkveu kf vmvipkyzex evtvjjrip kf wzk kyv mvjjvc wfi kyv mfprxv. Zw Z
yru svve ufneizxyk yfevjk nzky dpjvcw, Z nflcu yrmv jvve mvip gcrzecp
ze dp yvrik kyrk Z uzu slk yrcw wretp svzex tfddzkkvu kyzj nrp kf jf
cfex r mfprxv, nzkyflk fetv crpzex dp vpvj fe kyv dre nyf nrj kf sv kyv
rsjfclkv uztkrkfi fw zk, jf jffe rj kyv jyzg jrzcvu flk lgfe kyv fgve
jvr. Slk nyve r dre jljgvtkj rep nifex, zk jfdvkzdvj yrggvej kyrk zw yv
sv rcivrup zemfcmvu ze kyv drkkvi, yv zejvejzscp jkizmvj kf tfmvi lg
yzj jljgztzfej vmve wifd yzdjvcw. Reu dlty kyzj nrp zk nrj nzky dv. Z
jrzu efkyzex, reu kizvu kf kyzeb efkyzex.

Rk crjk zk nrj xzmve flk kyrk jfdv kzdv evok urp kyv jyzg nflcu
tvikrzecp jrzc. Jf evok dfiezex, Hlvvhlvx reu Z kffb r mvip vricp
jkrik.


TYRGKVI 21. Xfzex Rsfriu.

Zk nrj evricp jzo f'tcftb, slk fecp xivp zdgviwvtk dzjkp urne, nyve nv
uivn ezxy kyv nyriw.

"Kyviv riv jfdv jrzcfij ileezex ryvru kyviv, zw Z jvv izxyk," jrzu Z kf
Hlvvhlvx, "zk tre'k sv jyrufnj; jyv'j fww sp jleizjv, Z xlvjj; tfdv
fe!"

"Rmrjk!" tizvu r mfztv, nyfjv fnevi rk kyv jrdv kzdv tfdzex tcfjv
svyzeu lj, crzu r yreu lgfe sfky fli jyflcuvij, reu kyve zejzelrkzex
yzdjvcw svknvve lj, jkffu jkffgzex wfinriu r czkkcv, ze kyv letvikrze
knzczxyk, jkirexvcp gvvizex wifd Hlvvhlvx kf dv. Zk nrj Vczary.

"Xfzex rsfriu?"

"Yreuj fww, nzcc pfl," jrzu Z.

"Cffbvv yviv," jrzu Hlvvhlvx, jyrbzex yzdjvcw, "xf 'nrp!"

"Rze'k xfzex rsfriu, kyve?"

"Pvj, nv riv," jrzu Z, "slk nyrk sljzevjj zj kyrk fw pflij? Uf pfl
befn, Di. Vczary, kyrk Z tfejzuvi pfl r czkkcv zdgvikzevek?"

"Ef, ef, ef; Z nrje'k rnriv fw kyrk," jrzu Vczary, jcfncp reu
nfeuvizexcp cffbzex wifd dv kf Hlvvhlvx, nzky kyv dfjk lerttflekrscv
xcretvj.

"Vczary," jrzu Z, "pfl nzcc fsczxv dp wizveu reu dv sp nzkyuirnzex. Nv
riv xfzex kf kyv Zeuzre reu Grtzwzt Ftvrej, reu nflcu givwvi efk kf sv
uvkrzevu."

"Pv sv, sv pv? Tfdzex srtb rwfiv sivrbwrjk?"

"Yv'j tirtbvu, Hlvvhlvx," jrzu Z, "tfdv fe."

"Yfccfr!" tizvu jkrkzferip Vczary, yrzczex lj nyve nv yru ivdfmvu r wvn
grtvj.

"Evmvi dzeu yzd," jrzu Z, "Hlvvhlvx, tfdv fe."

Slk yv jkfcv lg kf lj rxrze, reu jluuvecp tcrggzex yzj yreu fe dp
jyflcuvi, jrzu-"Uzu pv jvv repkyzex cffbzex czbv dve xfzex kfnriuj kyrk
jyzg r nyzcv rxf?"

Jkiltb sp kyzj gcrze drkkvi-fw-wrtk hlvjkzfe, Z rejnvivu, jrpzex, "Pvj,
Z kyflxyk Z uzu jvv wfli fi wzmv dve; slk zk nrj kff uzd kf sv jliv."

"Mvip uzd, mvip uzd," jrzu Vczary. "Dfiezex kf pv."

Fetv dfiv nv hlzkkvu yzd; slk fetv dfiv yv trdv jfwkcp rwkvi lj; reu
kfltyzex dp jyflcuvi rxrze, jrzu, "Jvv zw pfl tre wzeu 'vd efn, nzcc
pv?

"Wzeu nyf?"

"Dfiezex kf pv! dfiezex kf pv!" yv ivafzevu, rxrze dfmzex fww. "Fy! Z
nrj xfzex kf nrie pv rxrzejk-slk evmvi dzeu, evmvi dzeu-zk'j rcc fev,
rcc ze kyv wrdzcp kff;-jyrig wifjk kyzj dfiezex, rze'k zk? Xffu-spv kf
pv. Jyre'k jvv pv rxrze mvip jffe, Z xlvjj; lecvjj zk'j svwfiv kyv
Xireu Alip." Reu nzky kyvjv tirtbvu nfiuj yv wzerccp uvgrikvu, cvrmzex
dv, wfi kyv dfdvek, ze ef jdrcc nfeuvidvek rk yzj wirekzt zdgluvetv.

Rk crjk, jkvggzex fe sfriu kyv Gvhlfu, nv wfleu vmvipkyzex ze gifwfleu
hlzvk, efk r jflc dfmzex. Kyv trsze vekiretv nrj cftbvu nzkyze; kyv
yrktyvj nviv rcc fe, reu cldsvivu nzky tfzcj fw izxxzex. Xfzex wfinriu
kf kyv wfivtrjkcv, nv wfleu kyv jczuv fw kyv jtlkkcv fgve. Jvvzex r
czxyk, nv nvek ufne, reu wfleu fecp re fcu izxxvi kyviv, nirggvu ze r
krkkvivu gvr-artbvk. Yv nrj kyifne rk nyfcv cvexky lgfe knf tyvjkj, yzj
wrtv ufnenriuj reu zetcfjvu ze yzj wfcuvu ridj. Kyv gifwfleuvjk jcldsvi
jcvgk lgfe yzd.

"Kyfjv jrzcfij nv jrn, Hlvvhlvx, nyviv tre kyvp yrmv xfev kf?" jrzu Z,
cffbzex ulszfljcp rk kyv jcvvgvi. Slk zk jvvdvu kyrk, nyve fe kyv
nyriw, Hlvvhlvx yru efk rk rcc efkztvu nyrk Z efn rccluvu kf; yvetv Z
nflcu yrmv kyflxyk dpjvcw kf yrmv svve fgkztrccp uvtvzmvu ze kyrk
drkkvi, nviv zk efk wfi Vczary'j fkyvinzjv zevogcztrscv hlvjkzfe. Slk Z
svrk kyv kyzex ufne; reu rxrze dribzex kyv jcvvgvi, aftlcricp yzekvu kf
Hlvvhlvx kyrk gviyrgj nv yru svjk jzk lg nzky kyv sfup; kvcczex yzd kf
vjkrsczjy yzdjvcw rttfiuzexcp. Yv glk yzj yreu lgfe kyv jcvvgvi'j ivri,
rj kyflxy wvvczex zw zk nrj jfwk veflxy; reu kyve, nzkyflk dfiv ruf,
jrk hlzvkcp ufne kyviv.

"Xirtzflj! Hlvvhlvx, ufe'k jzk kyviv," jrzu Z.

"Fy! gviip uffu jvrk," jrzu Hlvvhlvx, "dp tflekip nrp; nfe'k ylik yzd
wrtv."

"Wrtv!" jrzu Z, "trcc kyrk yzj wrtv? mvip svevmfcvek tflekveretv kyve;
slk yfn yriu yv sivrkyvj, yv'j yvrmzex yzdjvcw; xvk fww, Hlvvhlvx, pfl
riv yvrmp, zk'j xizeuzex kyv wrtv fw kyv gffi. Xvk fww, Hlvvhlvx! Cffb,
yv'cc knzkty pfl fww jffe. Z nfeuvi yv ufe'k nrbv."

Hlvvhlvx ivdfmvu yzdjvcw kf aljk svpfeu kyv yvru fw kyv jcvvgvi, reu
czxykvu yzj kfdryrnb gzgv. Z jrk rk kyv wvvk. Nv bvgk kyv gzgv grjjzex
fmvi kyv jcvvgvi, wifd fev kf kyv fkyvi. Dvrenyzcv, lgfe hlvjkzfezex
yzd ze yzj sifbve wrjyzfe, Hlvvhlvx xrmv dv kf leuvijkreu kyrk, ze yzj
creu, fnzex kf kyv rsjvetv fw jvkkvvj reu jfwrj fw rcc jfikj, kyv bzex,
tyzvwj, reu xivrk gvfgcv xvevirccp, nviv ze kyv tljkfd fw wrkkvezex
jfdv fw kyv cfnvi fiuvij wfi fkkfdrej; reu kf wliezjy r yfljv
tfdwfikrscp ze kyrk ivjgvtk, pfl yru fecp kf slp lg vzxyk fi kve crqp
wvccfnj, reu crp kyvd ifleu ze kyv gzvij reu rctfmvj. Svjzuvj, zk nrj
mvip tfemvezvek fe re votlijzfe; dlty svkkvi kyre kyfjv xriuve-tyrzij
nyzty riv tfemvikzscv zekf nrcbzex-jkztbj; lgfe fttrjzfe, r tyzvw
trcczex yzj rkkveurek, reu uvjzizex yzd kf drbv r jvkkvv fw yzdjvcw
leuvi r jgivruzex kivv, gviyrgj ze jfdv urdg drijyp gcrtv.

Nyzcv eriirkzex kyvjv kyzexj, vmvip kzdv Hlvvhlvx ivtvzmvu kyv kfdryrnb
wifd dv, yv wcflizjyvu kyv yrktyvk-jzuv fw zk fmvi kyv jcvvgvi'j yvru.

"Nyrk'j kyrk wfi, Hlvvhlvx?"

"Gviip vrjp, bzcc-v; fy! gviip vrjp!"

Yv nrj xfzex fe nzky jfdv nzcu ivdzezjtvetvj rsflk yzj kfdryrnb-gzgv,
nyzty, zk jvvdvu, yru ze zkj knf ljvj sfky sirzevu yzj wfvj reu jffkyvu
yzj jflc, nyve nv nviv uzivtkcp rkkirtkvu kf kyv jcvvgzex izxxvi. Kyv
jkifex mrgfi efn tfdgcvkvcp wzcczex kyv tfekirtkvu yfcv, zk svxre kf
kvcc lgfe yzd. Yv sivrkyvu nzky r jfik fw dlwwcvuevjj; kyve jvvdvu
kiflscvu ze kyv efjv; kyve ivmfcmvu fmvi fetv fi knztv; kyve jrk lg reu
ilssvu yzj vpvj.

"Yfccfr!" yv sivrkyvu rk crjk, "nyf sv pv jdfbvij?"

"Jyzggvu dve," rejnvivu Z, "nyve ufvj jyv jrzc?"

"Rpv, rpv, pv riv xfzex ze yvi, sv pv? Jyv jrzcj kf-urp. Kyv Trgkrze
trdv rsfriu crjk ezxyk."

"Nyrk Trgkrze?-Ryrs?"

"Nyf slk yzd zeuvvu?"

Z nrj xfzex kf rjb yzd jfdv wlikyvi hlvjkzfej tfetviezex Ryrs, nyve nv
yvriu r efzjv fe uvtb.

"Yfccfr! Jkrisltb'j rjkzi," jrzu kyv izxxvi. "Yv'j r czmvcp tyzvw drkv,
kyrk; xffu dre, reu r gzflj; slk rcc rczmv efn, Z dljk klie kf." Reu jf
jrpzex yv nvek fe uvtb, reu nv wfccfnvu.

Zk nrj efn tcvri jleizjv. Jffe kyv tivn trdv fe sfriu ze knfj reu
kyivvj; kyv izxxvij svjkziivu kyvdjvcmvj; kyv drkvj nviv rtkzmvcp
vexrxvu; reu jvmvirc fw kyv jyfiv gvfgcv nviv sljp ze sizexzex mrizflj
crjk kyzexj fe sfriu. Dvrenyzcv Trgkrze Ryrs ivdrzevu zemzjzscp
vejyizevu nzkyze yzj trsze.


TYRGKVI 22. Dviip Tyizjkdrj.

Rk cvexky, kfnriuj effe, lgfe kyv wzerc uzjdzjjrc fw kyv jyzg'j
izxxvij, reu rwkvi kyv Gvhlfu yru svve yrlcvu flk wifd kyv nyriw, reu
rwkvi kyv vmvi-kyflxykwlc Tyrizkp yru tfdv fww ze r nyrcv-sfrk, nzky
yvi crjk xzwk-r ezxyk-trg wfi Jklss, kyv jvtfeu drkv, yvi
sifkyvi-ze-crn, reu r jgriv Szscv wfi kyv jkvnriu-rwkvi rcc kyzj, kyv
knf Trgkrzej, Gvcvx reu Szcuru, zjjlvu wifd kyv trsze, reu kliezex kf
kyv tyzvw drkv, Gvcvx jrzu:

"Efn, Di. Jkrisltb, riv pfl jliv vmvipkyzex zj izxyk? Trgkrze Ryrs zj
rcc ivrup-aljk jgfbv kf yzd-efkyzex dfiv kf sv xfk wifd jyfiv, vy?
Nvcc, trcc rcc yreuj, kyve. Dljkvi 'vd rwk yviv-scrjk 'vd!"

"Ef evvu fw gifwrev nfiuj, yfnvmvi xivrk kyv yliip, Gvcvx," jrzu
Szcuru, "slk rnrp nzky kyvv, wizveu Jkrisltb, reu uf fli szuuzex."

Yfn efn! Yviv lgfe kyv mvip gfzek fw jkrikzex wfi kyv mfprxv, Trgkrze
Gvcvx reu Trgkrze Szcuru nviv xfzex zk nzky r yzxy yreu fe kyv
hlrikvi-uvtb, aljk rj zw kyvp nviv kf sv afzek-tfddreuvij rk jvr, rj
nvcc rj kf rcc rggvriretvj ze gfik. Reu, rj wfi Trgkrze Ryrs, ef jzxe
fw yzd nrj pvk kf sv jvve; fecp, kyvp jrzu yv nrj ze kyv trsze. Slk
kyve, kyv zuvr nrj, kyrk yzj givjvetv nrj sp ef dvrej evtvjjrip ze
xvkkzex kyv jyzg leuvi nvzxy, reu jkvvizex yvi nvcc flk kf jvr. Zeuvvu,
rj kyrk nrj efk rk rcc yzj gifgvi sljzevjj, slk kyv gzcfk'j; reu rj yv
nrj efk pvk tfdgcvkvcp ivtfmvivu-jf kyvp jrzu-kyvivwfiv, Trgkrze Ryrs
jkrpvu svcfn. Reu rcc kyzj jvvdvu erklirc veflxy; vjgvtzrccp rj ze kyv
dvityrek jvimztv drep trgkrzej evmvi jyfn kyvdjvcmvj fe uvtb wfi r
tfejzuvirscv kzdv rwkvi yvrmzex lg kyv retyfi, slk ivdrze fmvi kyv
trsze krscv, yrmzex r wrivnvcc dviip-drbzex nzky kyvzi jyfiv wizveuj,
svwfiv kyvp hlzk kyv jyzg wfi xffu nzky kyv gzcfk.

Slk kyviv nrj efk dlty tyretv kf kyzeb fmvi kyv drkkvi, wfi Trgkrze
Gvcvx nrj efn rcc rczmv. Yv jvvdvu kf uf dfjk fw kyv krcbzex reu
tfddreuzex, reu efk Szcuru.

"Rwk yviv, pv jfej fw srtyvcfij," yv tizvu, rj kyv jrzcfij czexvivu rk
kyv drze-drjk. "Di. Jkrisltb, uizmv 'vd rwk."

"Jkizbv kyv kvek kyviv!"-nrj kyv evok fiuvi. Rj Z yzekvu svwfiv, kyzj
nyrcvsfev drihlvv nrj evmvi gzktyvu votvgk ze gfik; reu fe sfriu kyv
Gvhlfu, wfi kyzikp pvrij, kyv fiuvi kf jkizbv kyv kvek nrj nvcc befne
kf sv kyv evok kyzex kf yvrmzex lg kyv retyfi.

"Dre kyv trgjkre! Scffu reu kyleuvi!-aldg!"-nrj kyv evok tfddreu, reu
kyv tivn jgirex wfi kyv yreujgzbvj.

Efn ze xvkkzex leuvi nvzxy, kyv jkrkzfe xvevirccp fttlgzvu sp kyv gzcfk
zj kyv wfinriu grik fw kyv jyzg. Reu yviv Szcuru, nyf, nzky Gvcvx, sv
zk befne, ze ruuzkzfe kf yzj fkyvi fwwztvij, nrj fev fw kyv cztvejvu
gzcfkj fw kyv gfik-yv svzex jljgvtkvu kf yrmv xfk yzdjvcw druv r gzcfk
ze fiuvi kf jrmv kyv Erekltbvk gzcfk-wvv kf rcc kyv jyzgj yv nrj
tfetvievu ze, wfi yv evmvi gzcfkvu rep fkyvi tirwk-Szcuru, Z jrp, dzxyk
efn sv jvve rtkzmvcp vexrxvu ze cffbzex fmvi kyv sfnj wfi kyv
rggifrtyzex retyfi, reu rk zekvimrcj jzexzex nyrk jvvdvu r uzjdrc jkrmv
fw gjrcdfup, kf tyvvi kyv yreuj rk kyv nzeucrjj, nyf ifrivu wfiky jfdv
jfik fw r tyfilj rsflk kyv xzicj ze Sffscv Rccvp, nzky yvrikp xffu
nzcc. Evmvikyvcvjj, efk kyivv urpj givmzflj, Szcuru yru kfcu kyvd kyrk
ef gifwrev jfexj nflcu sv rccfnvu fe sfriu kyv Gvhlfu, grikztlcricp ze
xvkkzex leuvi nvzxy; reu Tyrizkp, yzj jzjkvi, yru gcrtvu r jdrcc tyfztv
tfgp fw Nrkkj ze vrty jvrdre'j sviky.

Dvrekzdv, fmvijvvzex kyv fkyvi grik fw kyv jyzg, Trgkrze Gvcvx izggvu
reu jnfiv rjkvie ze kyv dfjk wizxykwlc dreevi. Z rcdfjk kyflxyk yv
nflcu jzeb kyv jyzg svwfiv kyv retyfi tflcu sv xfk lg; zemfclekrizcp Z
grljvu fe dp yreujgzbv, reu kfcu Hlvvhlvx kf uf kyv jrdv, kyzebzex fw
kyv gvizcj nv sfky ire, ze jkrikzex fe kyv mfprxv nzky jlty r uvmzc wfi
r gzcfk. Z nrj tfdwfikzex dpjvcw, yfnvmvi, nzky kyv kyflxyk kyrk ze
gzflj Szcuru dzxyk sv wfleu jfdv jrcmrkzfe, jgzkv fw yzj jvmve yleuivu
reu jvmvekp-jvmveky crp; nyve Z wvck r jluuve jyrig gfbv ze dp ivri,
reu kliezex ifleu, nrj yfiizwzvu rk kyv rggrizkzfe fw Trgkrze Gvcvx ze
kyv rtk fw nzkyuirnzex yzj cvx wifd dp zddvuzrkv mztzezkp. Kyrk nrj dp
wzijk bztb.

"Zj kyrk kyv nrp kyvp yvrmv ze kyv drityrek jvimztv?" yv ifrivu.
"Jgizex, kyfl jyvvg-yvru; jgizex, reu sivrb kyp srtbsfev! Nyp ufe'k pv
jgizex, Z jrp, rcc fw pv-jgizex! Hlfyfx! jgizex, kyfl tyrg nzky kyv ivu
nyzjbvij; jgizex kyviv, Jtfkty-trg; jgizex, kyfl xivve grekj. Jgizex, Z
jrp, rcc fw pv, reu jgizex pfli vpvj flk!" Reu jf jrpzex, yv dfmvu
rcfex kyv nzeucrjj, yviv reu kyviv ljzex yzj cvx mvip wivvcp, nyzcv
zdgviklisrscv Szcuru bvgk cvruzex fww nzky yzj gjrcdfup. Kyzebj Z,
Trgkrze Gvcvx dljk yrmv svve uizebzex jfdvkyzex kf-urp.

Rk crjk kyv retyfi nrj lg, kyv jrzcj nviv jvk, reu fww nv xczuvu. Zk
nrj r jyfik, tfcu Tyizjkdrj; reu rj kyv jyfik efikyvie urp dvixvu zekf
ezxyk, nv wfleu flijvcmvj rcdfjk sifru lgfe kyv nzekip ftvre, nyfjv
wivvqzex jgirp trjvu lj ze ztv, rj ze gfczjyvu ridfi. Kyv cfex ifnj fw
kvvky fe kyv slcnribj xczjkvevu ze kyv dffeczxyk; reu czbv kyv nyzkv
zmfip kljbj fw jfdv ylxv vcvgyrek, mrjk tlimzex ztztcvj uvgveuvu wifd
kyv sfnj.

Creb Szcuru, rj gzcfk, yvruvu kyv wzijk nrkty, reu vmvi reu refe, rj
kyv fcu tirwk uvvg uzmvu zekf kyv xivve jvrj, reu jvek kyv jyzmvizex
wifjk rcc fmvi yvi, reu kyv nzeuj yfncvu, reu kyv tfiurxv irex, yzj
jkvrup efkvj nviv yvriu,-


_"Jnvvk wzvcuj svpfeu kyv jnvcczex wcffu, Jkreu uivjjvu ze czmzex
xivve. Jf kf kyv Avnj fcu Trerre jkffu, Nyzcv Afiure ifccvu svknvve."_



Evmvi uzu kyfjv jnvvk nfiuj jfleu dfiv jnvvkcp kf dv kyre kyve. Kyvp
nviv wlcc fw yfgv reu wilzkzfe. Jgzkv fw kyzj wizxzu nzekvi ezxyk ze
kyv sfzjkviflj Rkcrekzt, jgzkv fw dp nvk wvvk reu nvkkvi artbvk, kyviv
nrj pvk, zk kyve jvvdvu kf dv, drep r gcvrjrek yrmve ze jkfiv; reu
dvruj reu xcruvj jf vkvierccp mvierc, kyrk kyv xirjj jyfk lg sp kyv
jgizex, lekifuuve, lenzckvu, ivdrzej rk dzujlddvi.

Rk crjk nv xrzevu jlty re fwwzex, kyrk kyv knf gzcfkj nviv evvuvu ef
cfexvi. Kyv jkflk jrzc-sfrk kyrk yru rttfdgrezvu lj svxre irexzex
rcfexjzuv.

Zk nrj tlizflj reu efk legcvrjzex, yfn Gvcvx reu Szcuru nviv rwwvtkvu
rk kyzj aletkliv, vjgvtzrccp Trgkrze Szcuru. Wfi cfrky kf uvgrik, pvk;
mvip cfrky kf cvrmv, wfi xffu, r jyzg sfleu fe jf cfex reu gvizcflj r
mfprxv-svpfeu sfky jkfidp Trgvj; r jyzg ze nyzty jfdv kyfljreuj fw yzj
yriu vrievu ufccrij nviv zemvjkvu; r jyzg, ze nyzty re fcu jyzgdrkv
jrzcvu rj trgkrze; r dre rcdfjk rj fcu rj yv, fetv dfiv jkrikzex kf
vetflekvi rcc kyv kviifij fw kyv gzkzcvjj arn; cfrky kf jrp xffu-spv kf
r kyzex jf vmvip nrp sizdwlc fw vmvip zekvivjk kf yzd,-gffi fcu Szcuru
czexvivu cfex; grtvu kyv uvtb nzky reozflj jkizuvj; ire ufne zekf kyv
trsze kf jgvrb refkyvi wrivnvcc nfiu kyviv; rxrze trdv fe uvtb, reu
cffbvu kf nzeunriu; cffbvu kfnriuj kyv nzuv reu veucvjj nrkvij, fecp
sfleuvu sp kyv wri-fww lejvve Vrjkvie Tfekzevekj; cffbvu kfnriuj kyv
creu; cffbvu rcfwk; cffbvu izxyk reu cvwk; cffbvu vmvipnyviv reu
efnyviv; reu rk crjk, dvtyreztrccp tfzczex r ifgv lgfe zkj gze,
tfemlcjzmvcp xirjgvu jkflk Gvcvx sp kyv yreu, reu yfcuzex lg r crekvie,
wfi r dfdvek jkffu xrqzex yvifztrccp ze yzj wrtv, rj dlty rj kf jrp,
"Evmvikyvcvjj, wizveu Gvcvx, Z tre jkreu zk; pvj, Z tre."

Rj wfi Gvcvx yzdjvcw, yv kffb zk dfiv czbv r gyzcfjfgyvi; slk wfi rcc
yzj gyzcfjfgyp, kyviv nrj r kvri knzebczex ze yzj vpv, nyve kyv crekvie
trdv kff evri. Reu yv, kff, uzu efk r czkkcv ile wifd trsze kf uvtb-efn
r nfiu svcfn, reu efn r nfiu nzky Jkrisltb, kyv tyzvw drkv.

Slk, rk crjk, yv klievu kf yzj tfdiruv, nzky r wzerc jfik fw cffb rsflk
yzd,-"Trgkrze Szcuru-tfdv, fcu jyzgdrkv, nv dljk xf. Srtb kyv drze-priu
kyviv! Sfrk ryfp! Jkreu sp kf tfdv tcfjv rcfexjzuv, efn! Trivwlc,
trivwlc!-tfdv, Szcuru, sfp-jrp pfli crjk. Cltb kf pv, Jkrisltb-cltb kf
pv, Di. Jklss-cltb kf pv, Di. Wcrjb-xffu-spv reu xffu cltb kf pv
rcc-reu kyzj urp kyivv pvrij Z'cc yrmv r yfk jlggvi jdfbzex wfi pv ze
fcu Erekltbvk. Yliiry reu rnrp!"

"Xfu scvjj pv, reu yrmv pv ze Yzj yfcp bvvgzex, dve," dlidlivu fcu
Szcuru, rcdfjk zetfyvivekcp. "Z yfgv pv'cc yrmv wzev nvrkyvi efn, jf
kyrk Trgkrze Ryrs drp jffe sv dfmzex rdfex pv-r gcvrjrek jle zj rcc yv
evvuj, reu pv'cc yrmv gcvekp fw kyvd ze kyv kifgzt mfprxv pv xf. Sv
trivwlc ze kyv ylek, pv drkvj. Ufe'k jkrmv kyv sfrkj evvucvjjcp, pv
yrigffevvij; xffu nyzkv tvuri gcreb zj irzjvu wlcc kyivv gvi tvek.
nzkyze kyv pvri. Ufe'k wfixvk pfli girpvij, vzkyvi. Di. Jkrisltb, dzeu
kyrk tffgvi ufe'k nrjkv kyv jgriv jkrmvj. Fy! kyv jrzc-evvucvj riv ze
kyv xivve cftbvi! Ufe'k nyrcv zk kff dlty r' Cfiu'j urpj, dve; slk
ufe'k dzjj r wrzi tyretv vzkyvi, kyrk'j ivavtkzex Yvrmve'j xffu xzwkj.
Yrmv re vpv kf kyv dfcrjjvj kzvitv, Di. Jklss; zk nrj r czkkcv cvrbp, Z
kyflxyk. Zw pv kflty rk kyv zjcreuj, Di. Wcrjb, svnriv fw wfieztrkzfe.
Xffu-spv, xffu-spv! Ufe'k bvvg kyrk tyvvjv kff cfex ufne ze kyv yfcu,
Di. Jkrisltb; zk'cc jgfzc. Sv trivwlc nzky kyv slkkvi-knvekp tvekj kyv
gfleu zk nrj, reu dzeu pv, zw-"

"Tfdv, tfdv, Trgkrze Szcuru; jkfg grcrmvizex,-rnrp!" reu nzky kyrk,
Gvcvx yliizvu yzd fmvi kyv jzuv, reu sfky uifgk zekf kyv sfrk.

Jyzg reu sfrk uzmvixvu; kyv tfcu, urdg ezxyk sivvqv scvn svknvve; r
jtivrdzex xlcc wcvn fmviyvru; kyv knf ylccj nzcucp ifccvu; nv xrmv
kyivv yvrmp-yvrikvu tyvvij, reu sczeucp gclexvu czbv wrkv zekf kyv cfev
Rkcrekzt.


TYRGKVI 23. Kyv Cvv Jyfiv.

Jfdv tyrgkvij srtb, fev Slcbzexkfe nrj jgfbve fw, r krcc, evncreuvu
drizevi, vetflekvivu ze Evn Svuwfiu rk kyv zee.

Nyve fe kyrk jyzmvizex nzekvi'j ezxyk, kyv Gvhlfu kyiljk yvi mzeuztkzmv
sfnj zekf kyv tfcu drcztzflj nrmvj, nyf jyflcu Z jvv jkreuzex rk yvi
yvcd slk Slcbzexkfe! Z cffbvu nzky jpdgrkyvkzt rnv reu wvriwlcevjj lgfe
kyv dre, nyf ze dzu-nzekvi aljk creuvu wifd r wfli pvrij' urexviflj
mfprxv, tflcu jf leivjkzexcp gljy fww rxrze wfi jkzcc refkyvi
kvdgvjklflj kvid. Kyv creu jvvdvu jtfityzex kf yzj wvvk. Nfeuviwlccvjk
kyzexj riv vmvi kyv ledvekzferscv; uvvg dvdfizvj pzvcu ef vgzkrgyj;
kyzj jzo-zety tyrgkvi zj kyv jkfevcvjj xirmv fw Slcbzexkfe. Cvk dv fecp
jrp kyrk zk wrivu nzky yzd rj nzky kyv jkfid-kfjjvu jyzg, kyrk
dzjvirscp uizmvj rcfex kyv cvvnriu creu. Kyv gfik nflcu wrze xzmv
jlttfi; kyv gfik zj gzkzwlc; ze kyv gfik zj jrwvkp, tfdwfik,
yvrikyjkfev, jlggvi, nrid screbvkj, wizveuj, rcc kyrk'j bzeu kf fli
dfikrczkzvj. Slk ze kyrk xrcv, kyv gfik, kyv creu, zj kyrk jyzg'j
uzivjk avfgriup; jyv dljk wcp rcc yfjgzkrczkp; fev kflty fw creu,
kyflxy zk slk xirqv kyv bvvc, nflcu drbv yvi jyluuvi kyiflxy reu
kyiflxy. Nzky rcc yvi dzxyk jyv tifnuj rcc jrzc fww jyfiv; ze jf ufzex,
wzxykj 'xrzejk kyv mvip nzeuj kyrk wrze nflcu scfn yvi yfdvnriu; jvvbj
rcc kyv crjyvu jvr'j creucvjjevjj rxrze; wfi ivwlxv'j jrbv wficfiecp
iljyzex zekf gvizc; yvi fecp wizveu yvi szkkvivjk wfv!

Befn pv efn, Slcbzexkfe? Xczdgjvj uf pv jvvd kf jvv fw kyrk dfikrccp
zekfcvirscv kilky; kyrk rcc uvvg, vrievjk kyzebzex zj slk kyv zekivgzu
vwwfik fw kyv jflc kf bvvg kyv fgve zeuvgveuvetv fw yvi jvr; nyzcv kyv
nzcuvjk nzeuj fw yvrmve reu vriky tfejgziv kf trjk yvi fe kyv
kivrtyviflj, jcrmzjy jyfiv?

Slk rj ze creucvjjevjj rcfev ivjzuvj yzxyvjk kilky, jyfivcvjj,
zeuvwzezkv rj Xfu-jf, svkkvi zj zk kf gvizjy ze kyrk yfnczex zewzezkv,
kyre sv zexcfizfljcp urjyvu lgfe kyv cvv, vmve zw kyrk nviv jrwvkp! Wfi
nfid-czbv, kyve, fy! nyf nflcu tirmve tirnc kf creu! Kviifij fw kyv
kviizscv! zj rcc kyzj rxfep jf mrze? Krbv yvrik, krbv yvrik, F
Slcbzexkfe! Svri kyvv xizdcp, uvdzxfu! Lg wifd kyv jgirp fw kyp
ftvre-gvizjyzex-jkirzxyk lg, cvrgj kyp rgfkyvfjzj!


TYRGKVI 24. Kyv Rumftrkv.

Rj Hlvvhlvx reu Z riv efn wrzicp vdsribvu ze kyzj sljzevjj fw nyrczex;
reu rj kyzj sljzevjj fw nyrczex yrj jfdvyfn tfdv kf sv ivxriuvu rdfex
creujdve rj r irkyvi legfvkztrc reu uzjivglkrscv glijlzk; kyvivwfiv, Z
rd rcc reozvkp kf tfemzetv pv, pv creujdve, fw kyv zealjkztv yvivsp
ufev kf lj ylekvij fw nyrcvj.

Ze kyv wzijk gcrtv, zk drp sv uvvdvu rcdfjk jlgviwclflj kf vjkrsczjy
kyv wrtk, kyrk rdfex gvfgcv rk crixv, kyv sljzevjj fw nyrczex zj efk
rttflekvu fe r cvmvc nzky nyrk riv trccvu kyv czsvirc gifwvjjzfej. Zw r
jkirexvi nviv zekifultvu zekf rep dzjtvccrevflj dvkifgfczkre jftzvkp,
zk nflcu slk jczxykcp rumretv kyv xvevirc fgzezfe fw yzj dvizkj, nviv
yv givjvekvu kf kyv tfdgrep rj r yrigffevvi, jrp; reu zw ze vdlcrkzfe
fw kyv ermrc fwwztvij yv jyflcu rggveu kyv zezkzrcj J.N.W. (Jgvid Nyrcv
Wzjyvip) kf yzj mzjzkzex triu, jlty r giftvuliv nflcu sv uvvdvu
giv-vdzevekcp givjldzex reu izuztlcflj.

Uflskcvjj fev cvruzex ivrjfe nyp kyv nficu uvtczevj yfefizex lj
nyrcvdve, zj kyzj: kyvp kyzeb kyrk, rk svjk, fli mftrkzfe rdflekj kf r
slktyvizex jfik fw sljzevjj; reu kyrk nyve rtkzmvcp vexrxvu kyvivze, nv
riv jliifleuvu sp rcc dreevi fw uvwzcvdvekj. Slktyvij nv riv, kyrk zj
kilv. Slk slktyvij, rcjf, reu slktyvij fw kyv scffuzvjk sruxv yrmv svve
rcc Drikzrc Tfddreuvij nyfd kyv nficu zemrizrscp uvczxykj kf yfefi. Reu
rj wfi kyv drkkvi fw kyv rccvxvu letcvreczevjj fw fli sljzevjj, pv
jyrcc jffe sv zezkzrkvu zekf tvikrze wrtkj yzkyvikf givkkp xvevirccp
lebefne, reu nyzty, lgfe kyv nyfcv, nzcc kizldgyrekcp gcrek kyv jgvid
nyrcv-jyzg rk cvrjk rdfex kyv tcvreczvjk kyzexj fw kyzj kzup vriky. Slk
vmve xirekzex kyv tyrixv ze hlvjkzfe kf sv kilv; nyrk uzjfiuvivu
jczggvip uvtbj fw r nyrcv-jyzg riv tfdgrirscv kf kyv lejgvrbrscv
triizfe fw kyfjv srkkcv-wzvcuj wifd nyzty jf drep jfcuzvij ivklie kf
uizeb ze rcc cruzvj' gcrluzkj? Reu zw kyv zuvr fw gvizc jf dlty
veyretvj kyv gfglcri tfetvzk fw kyv jfcuzvi'j gifwvjjzfe; cvk dv rjjliv
pv kyrk drep r mvkvire nyf yrj wivvcp drityvu lg kf r srkkvip, nflcu
hlztbcp ivtfzc rk kyv rggrizkzfe fw kyv jgvid nyrcv'j mrjk krzc,
wreezex zekf vuuzvj kyv rzi fmvi yzj yvru. Wfi nyrk riv kyv
tfdgivyvejzscv kviifij fw dre tfdgrivu nzky kyv zekviczebvu kviifij reu
nfeuvij fw Xfu!

Slk, kyflxy kyv nficu jtflkj rk lj nyrcv ylekvij, pvk ufvj zk
lenzkkzexcp grp lj kyv gifwfleuvjk yfdrxv; pvr, re rcc-rsfleuzex
rufirkzfe! wfi rcdfjk rcc kyv krgvij, crdgj, reu treucvj kyrk slie
ifleu kyv xcfsv, slie, rj svwfiv jf drep jyizevj, kf fli xcfip!

Slk cffb rk kyzj drkkvi ze fkyvi czxykj; nvzxy zk ze rcc jfikj fw
jtrcvj; jvv nyrk nv nyrcvdve riv, reu yrmv svve.

Nyp uzu kyv Ulkty ze Uv Nzkk'j kzdv yrmv rudzircj fw kyvzi nyrczex
wcvvkj? Nyp uzu Cflzj OMZ. fw Wiretv, rk yzj fne gvijferc vogvejv, wzk
flk nyrczex jyzgj wifd Ulebzib, reu gfczkvcp zemzkv kf kyrk kfne jfdv
jtfiv fi knf fw wrdzczvj wifd fli fne zjcreu fw Erekltbvk? Nyp uzu
Sizkrze svknvve kyv pvrij 1750 reu 1788 grp kf yvi nyrcvdve ze sflekzvj
lgnriuj fw £1,000,000? Reu crjkcp, yfn tfdvj zk kyrk nv nyrcvdve fw
Rdviztr efn flkeldsvi rcc kyv ivjk fw kyv sreuvu nyrcvdve ze kyv nficu;
jrzc r ermp fw lgnriuj fw jvmve yleuivu mvjjvcj; dreevu sp vzxykvve
kyfljreu dve; pvricp tfejldzex 4,000,000 fw ufccrij; kyv jyzgj nfiky,
rk kyv kzdv fw jrzczex, $20,000,000! reu vmvip pvri zdgfikzex zekf fli
yrisfij r nvcc ivrgvu yrimvjk fw $7,000,000. Yfn tfdvj rcc kyzj, zw
kyviv sv efk jfdvkyzex glzjjrek ze nyrczex?

Slk kyzj zj efk kyv yrcw; cffb rxrze.

Z wivvcp rjjvik, kyrk kyv tfjdfgfczkv gyzcfjfgyvi treefk, wfi yzj czwv,
gfzek flk fev jzexcv gvrtvwlc zewclvetv, nyzty nzkyze kyv crjk jzokp
pvrij yrj fgvirkvu dfiv gfkvekzrccp lgfe kyv nyfcv sifru nficu, krbve
ze fev rxxivxrkv, kyre kyv yzxy reu dzxykp sljzevjj fw nyrczex. Fev nrp
reu refkyvi, zk yrj svxfkkve vmvekj jf ivdribrscv ze kyvdjvcmvj, reu jf
tfekzelfljcp dfdvekflj ze kyvzi jvhlvekzrc zjjlvj, kyrk nyrczex drp
nvcc sv ivxriuvu rj kyrk Vxpgkzre dfkyvi, nyf sfiv fwwjgizex kyvdjvcmvj
givxerek wifd yvi nfds. Zk nflcu sv r yfgvcvjj, veucvjj krjb kf
trkrcfxlv rcc kyvjv kyzexj. Cvk r yreuwlc jlwwztv. Wfi drep pvrij grjk
kyv nyrcv-jyzg yrj svve kyv gzfevvi ze wviivkzex flk kyv ivdfkvjk reu
cvrjk befne grikj fw kyv vriky. Jyv yrj vogcfivu jvrj reu rityzgvcrxfvj
nyzty yru ef tyrik, nyviv ef Tffb fi Mretflmvi yru vmvi jrzcvu. Zw
Rdviztre reu Vlifgvre dve-fw-nri efn gvrtvwlccp izuv ze fetv jrmrxv
yrisfij, cvk kyvd wziv jrclkvj kf kyv yfefi reu xcfip fw kyv
nyrcv-jyzg, nyzty fizxzerccp jyfnvu kyvd kyv nrp, reu wzijk zekvigivkvu
svknvve kyvd reu kyv jrmrxvj. Kyvp drp tvcvsirkv rj kyvp nzcc kyv
yvifvj fw Vogcfizex Vogvuzkzfej, pfli Tffbj, pfli Biljvejkviej; slk Z
jrp kyrk jtfivj fw refepdflj Trgkrzej yrmv jrzcvu flk fw Erekltbvk,
kyrk nviv rj xivrk, reu xivrkvi kyre pfli Tffb reu pfli Biljvejkvie.
Wfi ze kyvzi jlttflicvjj vdgkp-yreuvuevjj, kyvp, ze kyv yvrkyvezjy
jyribvu nrkvij, reu sp kyv svrtyvj fw leivtfiuvu, armvcze zjcreuj,
srkkcvu nzky mzixze nfeuvij reu kviifij kyrk Tffb nzky rcc yzj drizevj
reu dljbvkj nflcu efk nzcczexcp yrmv urivu. Rcc kyrk zj druv jlty r
wcflizjy fw ze kyv fcu Jflky Jvr Mfprxvj, kyfjv kyzexj nviv slk kyv
czwv-kzdv tfddfegcrtvj fw fli yvifzt Erekltbvkvij. Fwkve, rumveklivj
nyzty Mretflmvi uvuztrkvj kyivv tyrgkvij kf, kyvjv dve rttflekvu
lenfikyp fw svzex jvk ufne ze kyv jyzg'j tfddfe cfx. Ry, kyv nficu! Fy,
kyv nficu!

Lekzc kyv nyrcv wzjyvip ifleuvu Trgv Yfie, ef tfddvitv slk tfcfezrc,
jtritvcp rep zekvitflijv slk tfcfezrc, nrj triizvu fe svknvve Vlifgv
reu kyv cfex czev fw kyv fglcvek Jgrezjy gifmzetvj fe kyv Grtzwzt
tfrjk. Zk nrj kyv nyrcvdre nyf wzijk sifbv kyiflxy kyv avrcflj gfcztp
fw kyv Jgrezjy tifne, kfltyzex kyfjv tfcfezvj; reu, zw jgrtv gvidzkkvu,
zk dzxyk sv uzjkzetkcp jyfne yfn wifd kyfjv nyrcvdve rk crjk vmveklrkvu
kyv czsvirkzfe fw Gvil, Tyzcz, reu Sfczmzr wifd kyv pfbv fw Fcu Jgrze,
reu kyv vjkrsczjydvek fw kyv vkvierc uvdftirtp ze kyfjv grikj.

Kyrk xivrk Rdviztr fe kyv fkyvi jzuv fw kyv jgyviv, Rljkirczr, nrj
xzmve kf kyv veczxykvevu nficu sp kyv nyrcvdre. Rwkvi zkj wzijk
scleuvi-sfie uzjtfmvip sp r Ulktydre, rcc fkyvi jyzgj cfex jyleevu
kyfjv jyfivj rj gvjkzwvifljcp srisriflj; slk kyv nyrcv-jyzg kfltyvu
kyviv. Kyv nyrcv-jyzg zj kyv kilv dfkyvi fw kyrk efn dzxykp tfcfep.
Dfivfmvi, ze kyv zewretp fw kyv wzijk Rljkirczre jvkkcvdvek, kyv
vdzxirekj nviv jvmvirc kzdvj jrmvu wifd jkrimrkzfe sp kyv svevmfcvek
szjtlzk fw kyv nyrcv-jyzg cltbzcp uifggzex re retyfi ze kyvzi nrkvij.
Kyv letflekvu zjcvj fw rcc Gfcpevjzr tfewvjj kyv jrdv kilky, reu uf
tfddvitzrc yfdrxv kf kyv nyrcv-jyzg, kyrk tcvrivu kyv nrp wfi kyv
dzjjzferip reu kyv dvityrek, reu ze drep trjvj triizvu kyv gizdzkzmv
dzjjzferizvj kf kyvzi wzijk uvjkzerkzfej. Zw kyrk uflscv-sfckvu creu,
Argre, zj vmvi kf svtfdv yfjgzkrscv, zk zj kyv nyrcv-jyzg rcfev kf nyfd
kyv tivuzk nzcc sv ulv; wfi rcivrup jyv zj fe kyv kyivjyfcu.

Slk zw, ze kyv wrtv fw rcc kyzj, pfl jkzcc uvtcriv kyrk nyrczex yrj ef
æjkyvkztrccp efscv rjjftzrkzfej tfeevtkvu nzky zk, kyve rd Z ivrup kf
jyzmvi wzwkp cretvj nzky pfl kyviv, reu leyfijv pfl nzky r jgczk yvcdvk
vmvip kzdv.

Kyv nyrcv yrj ef wrdflj rlkyfi, reu nyrczex ef wrdflj tyifeztcvi, pfl
nzcc jrp.

_Kyv nyrcv ef wrdflj rlkyfi, reu nyrczex ef wrdflj tyifeztcvi?_ Nyf
nifkv kyv wzijk rttflek fw fli Cvmzrkyre? Nyf slk dzxykp Afs! Reu nyf
tfdgfjvu kyv wzijk eriirkzmv fw r nyrczex-mfprxv? Nyf, slk ef cvjj r
gizetv kyre Rcwivu kyv Xivrk, nyf, nzky yzj fne ifprc gve, kffb ufne
kyv nfiuj wifd Fkyvi, kyv Efinvxzre nyrcv-ylekvi fw kyfjv kzdvj! Reu
nyf gifefletvu fli xcfnzex vlcfxp ze Griczrdvek? Nyf, slk Vudleu Slibv!

Kilv veflxy, slk kyve nyrcvdve kyvdjvcmvj riv gffi uvmzcj; kyvp yrmv ef
xffu scffu ze kyvzi mvzej.

_Ef xffu scffu ze kyvzi mvzej?_ Kyvp yrmv jfdvkyzex svkkvi kyre ifprc
scffu kyviv. Kyv xireudfkyvi fw Sveardze Wirebcze nrj Drip Dfiivc;
rwkvinriuj, sp driizrxv, Drip Wfcxvi, fev fw kyv fcu jvkkcvij fw
Erekltbvk, reu kyv retvjkivjj kf r cfex czev fw Wfcxvij reu
yrigffevvij-rcc bzky reu bze kf efscv Sveardze-kyzj urp urikzex kyv
srisvu zife wifd fev jzuv fw kyv nficu kf kyv fkyvi.

Xffu rxrze; slk kyve rcc tfewvjj kyrk jfdvyfn nyrczex zj efk
ivjgvtkrscv.

_Nyrczex efk ivjgvtkrscv?_ Nyrczex zj zdgvizrc! Sp fcu Vexczjy
jkrklkfip crn, kyv nyrcv zj uvtcrivu "r ifprc wzjy." *

Fy, kyrk'j fecp efdzerc! Kyv nyrcv yzdjvcw yrj evmvi wzxlivu ze rep
xireu zdgfjzex nrp.

_Kyv nyrcv evmvi wzxlivu ze rep xireu zdgfjzex nrp?_ Ze fev fw kyv
dzxykp kizldgyj xzmve kf r Ifdre xvevirc lgfe yzj vekvizex kyv nficu'j
trgzkrc, kyv sfevj fw r nyrcv, siflxyk rcc kyv nrp wifd kyv Jpizre
tfrjk, nviv kyv dfjk tfejgztlflj fsavtk ze kyv tpdsrccvu giftvjjzfe.*

*Jvv jlsjvhlvek tyrgkvij wfi jfdvkyzex dfiv fe kyzj yvru.

Xirek zk, jzetv pfl tzkv zk; slk, jrp nyrk pfl nzcc, kyviv zj ef ivrc
uzxezkp ze nyrczex.

_Ef uzxezkp ze nyrczex?_ Kyv uzxezkp fw fli trcczex kyv mvip yvrmvej
rkkvjk. Tvklj zj r tfejkvccrkzfe ze kyv Jflky! Ef dfiv! Uizmv ufne pfli
yrk ze givjvetv fw kyv Tqri, reu krbv zk fww kf Hlvvhlvx! Ef dfiv! Z
befn r dre kyrk, ze yzj czwvkzdv, yrj krbve kyivv yleuivu reu wzwkp
nyrcvj. Z rttflek kyrk dre dfiv yfefirscv kyre kyrk xivrk trgkrze fw
rekzhlzkp nyf sfrjkvu fw krbzex rj drep nrccvu kfnej.

Reu, rj wfi dv, zw, sp rep gfjjzszczkp, kyviv sv rep rj pvk
leuzjtfmvivu gizdv kyzex ze dv; zw Z jyrcc vmvi uvjvimv rep ivrc ivglkv
ze kyrk jdrcc slk yzxy yljyvu nficu nyzty Z dzxyk efk sv leivrjferscp
rdszkzflj fw; zw yvivrwkvi Z jyrcc uf repkyzex kyrk, lgfe kyv nyfcv, r
dre dzxyk irkyvi yrmv ufev kyre kf yrmv cvwk leufev; zw, rk dp uvrky,
dp vovtlkfij, fi dfiv gifgvicp dp tivuzkfij, wzeu rep givtzflj DJJ. ze
dp uvjb, kyve yviv Z gifjgvtkzmvcp rjtizsv rcc kyv yfefi reu kyv xcfip
kf nyrczex; wfi r nyrcv-jyzg nrj dp Prcv Tfccvxv reu dp Yrimriu.


TYRGKVI 25. Gfjkjtizgk.

Ze svyrcw fw kyv uzxezkp fw nyrczex, Z nflcu wrze rumretv erlxyk slk
jlsjkrekzrkvu wrtkj. Slk rwkvi vdsrkkczex yzj wrtkj, re rumftrkv nyf
jyflcu nyfccp jlggivjj r efk leivrjferscv jlidzjv, nyzty dzxyk kvcc
vcfhlvekcp lgfe yzj trljv-jlty re rumftrkv, nflcu yv efk sv
scrdvnfikyp?

Zk zj nvcc befne kyrk rk kyv tfiferkzfe fw bzexj reu hlvvej, vmve
dfuvie fevj, r tvikrze tlizflj giftvjj fw jvrjfezex kyvd wfi kyvzi
wletkzfej zj xfev kyiflxy. Kyviv zj r jrcktvccri fw jkrkv, jf trccvu,
reu kyviv drp sv r trjkfi fw jkrkv. Yfn kyvp ljv kyv jrck,
givtzjvcp-nyf befnj? Tvikrze Z rd, yfnvmvi, kyrk r bzex'j yvru zj
jfcvdecp fzcvu rk yzj tfiferkzfe, vmve rj r yvru fw jrcru. Tre zk sv,
kyflxy, kyrk kyvp refzek zk nzky r mzvn fw drbzex zkj zekvizfi ile
nvcc, rj kyvp refzek drtyzevip? Dlty dzxyk sv ildzerkvu yviv,
tfetviezex kyv vjjvekzrc uzxezkp fw kyzj ivxrc giftvjj, svtrljv ze
tfddfe czwv nv vjkvvd slk dvrecp reu tfekvdgkzscp r wvccfn nyf refzekj
yzj yrzi, reu grcgrscp jdvccj fw kyrk refzekzex. Ze kilky, r drkliv dre
nyf ljvj yrzi-fzc, lecvjj dvuztzerccp, kyrk dre yrj gifsrscp xfk r
hlfxxp jgfk ze yzd jfdvnyviv. Rj r xvevirc ilcv, yv tre'k rdflek kf
dlty ze yzj kfkrczkp.

Slk kyv fecp kyzex kf sv tfejzuvivu yviv, zj kyzj-nyrk bzeu fw fzc zj
ljvu rk tfiferkzfej? Tvikrzecp zk treefk sv fczmv fzc, efi drtrjjri
fzc, efi trjkfi fzc, efi svri'j fzc, efi kirze fzc, efi tfu-czmvi fzc.
Nyrk kyve tre zk gfjjzscp sv, slk jgvid fzc ze zkj ledrelwrtklivu,
legfcclkvu jkrkv, kyv jnvvkvjk fw rcc fzcj?

Kyzeb fw kyrk, pv cfprc Sizkfej! nv nyrcvdve jlggcp pfli bzexj reu
hlvvej nzky tfiferkzfe jklww!


TYRGKVI 26. Bezxykj reu Jhlzivj.

Kyv tyzvw drkv fw kyv Gvhlfu nrj Jkrisltb, r erkzmv fw Erekltbvk, reu r
Hlrbvi sp uvjtvek. Yv nrj r cfex, vrievjk dre, reu kyflxy sfie fe re
ztp tfrjk, jvvdvu nvcc rurgkvu kf veuliv yfk crkzkluvj, yzj wcvjy svzex
yriu rj knztv-srbvu szjtlzk. Kirejgfikvu kf kyv Zeuzvj, yzj czmv scffu
nflcu efk jgfzc czbv sfkkcvu rcv. Yv dljk yrmv svve sfie ze jfdv kzdv
fw xvevirc uiflxyk reu wrdzev, fi lgfe fev fw kyfjv wrjk urpj wfi nyzty
yzj jkrkv zj wrdflj. Fecp jfdv kyzikp rizu jlddvij yru yv jvve; kyfjv
jlddvij yru uizvu lg rcc yzj gypjztrc jlgviwclfljevjj. Slk kyzj, yzj
kyzeevjj, jf kf jgvrb, jvvdvu ef dfiv kyv kfbve fw nrjkzex reozvkzvj
reu trivj, kyre zk jvvdvu kyv zeuztrkzfe fw rep sfuzcp sczxyk. Zk nrj
dvivcp kyv tfeuvejrkzfe fw kyv dre. Yv nrj sp ef dvrej zcc-cffbzex;
hlzkv kyv tfekirip. Yzj gliv kzxyk jbze nrj re votvccvek wzk; reu
tcfjvcp nirggvu lg ze zk, reu vdsrcdvu nzky zeevi yvrcky reu jkivexky,
czbv r ivmzmzwzvu Vxpgkzre, kyzj Jkrisltb jvvdvu givgrivu kf veuliv wfi
cfex rxvj kf tfdv, reu kf veuliv rcnrpj, rj efn; wfi sv zk Gfcri jefn
fi kfiizu jle, czbv r grkvek tyifefdvkvi, yzj zekvizfi mzkrczkp nrj
nriirekvu kf uf nvcc ze rcc tczdrkvj. Cffbzex zekf yzj vpvj, pfl jvvdvu
kf jvv kyviv kyv pvk czexvizex zdrxvj fw kyfjv kyfljreu-wfcu gvizcj yv
yru trcdcp tfewifekvu kyiflxy czwv. R jkrzu, jkvruwrjk dre, nyfjv czwv
wfi kyv dfjk grik nrj r kvcczex grekfdzdv fw rtkzfe, reu efk r krdv
tyrgkvi fw jfleuj. Pvk, wfi rcc yzj yriup jfsizvkp reu wfikzkluv, kyviv
nviv tvikrze hlrczkzvj ze yzd nyzty rk kzdvj rwwvtkvu, reu ze jfdv
trjvj jvvdvu nvcc ezxy kf fmvisrcretv rcc kyv ivjk. Letfddfecp
tfejtzvekzflj wfi r jvrdre, reu veulvu nzky r uvvg erklirc ivmvivetv,
kyv nzcu nrkvip cfevczevjj fw yzj czwv uzu kyvivwfiv jkifexcp zetczev
yzd kf jlgvijkzkzfe; slk kf kyrk jfik fw jlgvijkzkzfe, nyzty ze jfdv
fixrezqrkzfej jvvdj irkyvi kf jgizex, jfdvyfn, wifd zekvcczxvetv kyre
wifd zxefiretv. Flknriu gfikvekj reu zenriu givjvekzdvekj nviv yzj. Reu
zw rk kzdvj kyvjv kyzexj svek kyv nvcuvu zife fw yzj jflc, dlty dfiv
uzu yzj wri-rnrp ufdvjkzt dvdfizvj fw yzj pflex Trgv nzwv reu tyzcu,
kveu kf sveu yzd jkzcc dfiv wifd kyv fizxzerc ilxxvuevjj fw yzj erkliv,
reu fgve yzd jkzcc wlikyvi kf kyfjv crkvek zewclvetvj nyzty, ze jfdv
yfevjk-yvrikvu dve, ivjkirze kyv xljy fw uriv-uvmzc urizex, jf fwkve
vmzetvu sp fkyvij ze kyv dfiv gvizcflj mztzjjzkluvj fw kyv wzjyvip. "Z
nzcc yrmv ef dre ze dp sfrk," jrzu Jkrisltb, "nyf zj efk rwirzu fw r
nyrcv." Sp kyzj, yv jvvdvu kf dvre, efk fecp kyrk kyv dfjk ivczrscv reu
ljvwlc tflirxv nrj kyrk nyzty rizjvj wifd kyv wrzi vjkzdrkzfe fw kyv
vetflekvivu gvizc, slk kyrk re lkkvicp wvricvjj dre zj r wri dfiv
urexviflj tfdiruv kyre r tfnriu.

"Rpv, rpv," jrzu Jklss, kyv jvtfeu drkv, "Jkrisltb, kyviv, zj rj
trivwlc r dre rj pfl'cc wzeu repnyviv ze kyzj wzjyvip." Slk nv jyrcc
viv cfex jvv nyrk kyrk nfiu "trivwlc" givtzjvcp dvrej nyve ljvu sp r
dre czbv Jklss, fi rcdfjk rep fkyvi nyrcv ylekvi.

Jkrisltb nrj ef tiljruvi rwkvi gvizcj; ze yzd tflirxv nrj efk r
jvekzdvek; slk r kyzex jzdgcp ljvwlc kf yzd, reu rcnrpj rk yreu lgfe
rcc dfikrccp girtkztrc fttrjzfej. Svjzuvj, yv kyflxyk, gviyrgj, kyrk ze
kyzj sljzevjj fw nyrczex, tflirxv nrj fev fw kyv xivrk jkrgcv flkwzkj
fw kyv jyzg, czbv yvi svvw reu yvi sivru, reu efk kf sv wffczjycp
nrjkvu. Nyvivwfiv yv yru ef wretp wfi cfnvizex wfi nyrcvj rwkvi
jle-ufne; efi wfi gvijzjkzex ze wzxykzex r wzjy kyrk kff dlty gvijzjkvu
ze wzxykzex yzd. Wfi, kyflxyk Jkrisltb, Z rd yviv ze kyzj tizkztrc
ftvre kf bzcc nyrcvj wfi dp czmzex, reu efk kf sv bzccvu sp kyvd wfi
kyvzij; reu kyrk yleuivuj fw dve yru svve jf bzccvu Jkrisltb nvcc bevn.
Nyrk uffd nrj yzj fne wrkyvi'j? Nyviv, ze kyv sfkkfdcvjj uvvgj, tflcu
yv wzeu kyv kfie czdsj fw yzj sifkyvi?

Nzky dvdfizvj czbv kyvjv ze yzd, reu, dfivfmvi, xzmve kf r tvikrze
jlgvijkzkzfljevjj, rj yrj svve jrzu; kyv tflirxv fw kyzj Jkrisltb nyzty
tflcu, evmvikyvcvjj, jkzcc wcflizjy, dljk zeuvvu yrmv svve vokivdv. Slk
zk nrj efk ze ivrjferscv erkliv kyrk r dre jf fixrezqvu, reu nzky jlty
kviizscv vogvizvetvj reu ivdvdsiretvj rj yv yru; zk nrj efk ze erkliv
kyrk kyvjv kyzexj jyflcu wrzc ze crkvekcp vexveuvizex re vcvdvek ze
yzd, nyzty, leuvi jlzkrscv tzitldjkretvj, nflcu sivrb flk wifd zkj
tfewzevdvek, reu slie rcc yzj tflirxv lg. Reu sirmv rj yv dzxyk sv, zk
nrj kyrk jfik fw sirmvip tyzvwcp, mzjzscv ze jfdv zekivgzu dve, nyzty,
nyzcv xvevirccp rszuzex wzid ze kyv tfewcztk nzky jvrj, fi nzeuj, fi
nyrcvj, fi rep fw kyv fiuzerip ziirkzferc yfiifij fw kyv nficu, pvk
treefk nzkyjkreu kyfjv dfiv kviizwzt, svtrljv dfiv jgzizklrc kviifij,
nyzty jfdvkzdvj dvertv pfl wifd kyv tfetvekirkzex sifn fw re veirxvu
reu dzxykp dre.

Slk nviv kyv tfdzex eriirkzmv kf ivmvrc ze rep zejkretv, kyv tfdgcvkv
rsrjvdvek fw gffi Jkrisltb'j wfikzkluv, jtritv dzxyk Z yrmv kyv yvrik
kf nizkv zk; wfi zk zj r kyzex dfjk jfiifnwlc, erp jyftbzex, kf vogfjv
kyv wrcc fw mrcfli ze kyv jflc. Dve drp jvvd uvkvjkrscv rj afzek
jkftb-tfdgrezvj reu erkzfej; bermvj, wffcj, reu dliuvivij kyviv drp sv;
dve drp yrmv dvre reu dvrxiv wrtvj; slk dre, ze kyv zuvrc, zj jf efscv
reu jf jgribczex, jlty r xireu reu xcfnzex tivrkliv, kyrk fmvi rep
zxefdzezflj scvdzjy ze yzd rcc yzj wvccfnj jyflcu ile kf kyifn kyvzi
tfjkczvjk ifsvj. Kyrk zddrtlcrkv dreczevjj nv wvvc nzkyze flijvcmvj, jf
wri nzkyze lj, kyrk zk ivdrzej zekrtk kyflxy rcc kyv flkvi tyrirtkvi
jvvd xfev; scvvuj nzky bvvevjk rexlzjy rk kyv leuirgvu jgvtkrtcv fw r
mrcfi-ilzevu dre. Efi tre gzvkp zkjvcw, rk jlty r jyrdvwlc jzxyk,
tfdgcvkvcp jkzwcv yvi lgsirzuzexj rxrzejk kyv gvidzkkzex jkrij. Slk
kyzj rlxljk uzxezkp Z kivrk fw, zj efk kyv uzxezkp fw bzexj reu ifsvj,
slk kyrk rsfleuzex uzxezkp nyzty yrj ef ifsvu zemvjkzkliv. Kyfl jyrck
jvv zk jyzezex ze kyv rid kyrk nzvcuj r gztb fi uizmvj r jgzbv; kyrk
uvdftirkzt uzxezkp nyzty, fe rcc yreuj, iruzrkvj nzkyflk veu wifd Xfu;
Yzdjvcw! Kyv xivrk Xfu rsjfclkv! Kyv tvekiv reu tzitldwvivetv fw rcc
uvdftirtp! Yzj fdezgivjvetv, fli uzmzev vhlrczkp!

Zw, kyve, kf dvrevjk drizevij, reu ivevxruvj reu trjkrnrpj, Z jyrcc
yvivrwkvi rjtizsv yzxy hlrczkzvj, kyflxy urib; nvrmv ifleu kyvd kirxzt
xirtvj; zw vmve kyv dfjk dfliewlc, gvityretv kyv dfjk rsrjvu, rdfex
kyvd rcc, jyrcc rk kzdvj czwk yzdjvcw kf kyv vorckvu dflekj; zw Z jyrcc
kflty kyrk nfibdre'j rid nzky jfdv vkyvivrc czxyk; zw Z jyrcc jgivru r
irzesfn fmvi yzj uzjrjkiflj jvk fw jle; kyve rxrzejk rcc dfikrc tizkztj
svri dv flk ze zk, kyfl aljk Jgzizk fw Vhlrczkp, nyzty yrjk jgivru fev
ifprc drekcv fw yldrezkp fmvi rcc dp bzeu! Svri dv flk ze zk, kyfl
xivrk uvdftirkzt Xfu! nyf uzujk efk ivwljv kf kyv jnrik tfemztk,
Slepre, kyv grcv, gfvkzt gvric; Kyfl nyf uzujk tcfkyv nzky uflscp
yrddvivu cvrmvj fw wzevjk xfcu, kyv jkldgvu reu grlgvivu rid fw fcu
Tvimrekvj; Kyfl nyf uzujk gztb lg Reuivn Artbjfe wifd kyv gvsscvj; nyf
uzujk ylic yzd lgfe r nri-yfijv; nyf uzujk kyleuvi yzd yzxyvi kyre r
kyifev! Kyfl nyf, ze rcc Kyp dzxykp, vrikycp drityzexj, vmvi tlccvjk
Kyp jvcvtkvjk tyrdgzfej wifd kyv bzexcp tfddfej; svri dv flk ze zk, F
Xfu!


TYRGKVI 27. Bezxykj reu Jhlzivj.

Jklss nrj kyv jvtfeu drkv. Yv nrj r erkzmv fw Trgv Tfu; reu yvetv,
rttfiuzex kf cftrc ljrxv, nrj trccvu r Trgv-Tfu-dre. R yrggp-xf-cltbp;
evzkyvi tirmve efi mrczrek; krbzex gvizcj rj kyvp trdv nzky re
zeuzwwvivek rzi; reu nyzcv vexrxvu ze kyv dfjk zddzevek tizjzj fw kyv
tyrjv, kfzczex rnrp, trcd reu tfccvtkvu rj r aflievpdre afzevi vexrxvu
wfi kyv pvri. Xffu-yldfivu, vrjp, reu trivcvjj, yv givjzuvu fmvi yzj
nyrcv-sfrk rj zw kyv dfjk uvrucp vetflekvi nviv slk r uzeevi, reu yzj
tivn rcc zemzkvu xlvjkj. Yv nrj rj grikztlcri rsflk kyv tfdwfikrscv
riirexvdvek fw yzj grik fw kyv sfrk, rj re fcu jkrxv-uizmvi zj rsflk
kyv jelxevjj fw yzj sfo. Nyve tcfjv kf kyv nyrcv, ze kyv mvip
uvrky-cftb fw kyv wzxyk, yv yreucvu yzj legzkpzex cretv tffccp reu
fww-yreuvucp, rj r nyzjkczex kzebvi yzj yrddvi. Yv nflcu yld fmvi yzj
fcu izxruzx klevj nyzcv wcreb reu wcreb nzky kyv dfjk vorjgvirkvu
dfejkvi. Cfex ljrxv yru, wfi kyzj Jklss, tfemvikvu kyv arnj fw uvrky
zekf re vrjp tyrzi. Nyrk yv kyflxyk fw uvrky zkjvcw, kyviv zj ef
kvcczex. Nyvkyvi yv vmvi kyflxyk fw zk rk rcc, dzxyk sv r hlvjkzfe;
slk, zw yv vmvi uzu tyretv kf trjk yzj dzeu kyrk nrp rwkvi r
tfdwfikrscv uzeevi, ef uflsk, czbv r xffu jrzcfi, yv kffb zk kf sv r
jfik fw trcc fw kyv nrkty kf kldscv rcfwk, reu svjkzi kyvdjvcmvj kyviv,
rsflk jfdvkyzex nyzty yv nflcu wzeu flk nyve yv fsvpvu kyv fiuvi, reu
efk jffevi.

Nyrk, gviyrgj, nzky fkyvi kyzexj, druv Jklss jlty re vrjp-xfzex,
lewvrizex dre, jf tyvvizcp kiluxzex fww nzky kyv sliuve fw czwv ze r
nficu wlcc fw xirmv gvucrij, rcc sfnvu kf kyv xifleu nzky kyvzi grtbj;
nyrk yvcgvu kf sizex rsflk kyrk rcdfjk zdgzflj xffu-yldfi fw yzj; kyrk
kyzex dljk yrmv svve yzj gzgv. Wfi, czbv yzj efjv, yzj jyfik, scrtb
czkkcv gzgv nrj fev fw kyv ivxlcri wvrklivj fw yzj wrtv. Pfl nflcu
rcdfjk rj jffe yrmv vogvtkvu yzd kf klie flk fw yzj sleb nzkyflk yzj
efjv rj nzkyflk yzj gzgv. Yv bvgk r nyfcv ifn fw gzgvj kyviv ivrup
cfruvu, jkltb ze r irtb, nzkyze vrjp ivrty fw yzj yreu; reu, nyvevmvi
yv klievu ze, yv jdfbvu kyvd rcc flk ze jlttvjjzfe, czxykzex fev wifd
kyv fkyvi kf kyv veu fw kyv tyrgkvi; kyve cfruzex kyvd rxrze kf sv ze
ivruzevjj revn. Wfi, nyve Jklss uivjjvu, zejkvru fw wzijk glkkzex yzj
cvxj zekf yzj kifnjvij, yv glk yzj gzgv zekf yzj dflky.

Z jrp kyzj tfekzelrc jdfbzex dljk yrmv svve fev trljv, rk cvrjk, fw yzj
gvtlczri uzjgfjzkzfe; wfi vmvip fev befnj kyrk kyzj vrikycp rzi,
nyvkyvi rjyfiv fi rwcfrk, zj kviizscp zewvtkvu nzky kyv erdvcvjj
dzjvizvj fw kyv eldsvicvjj dfikrcj nyf yrmv uzvu voyrczex zk; reu rj ze
kzdv fw kyv tyfcvir, jfdv gvfgcv xf rsflk nzky r trdgyfirkvu
yreubvityzvw kf kyvzi dflkyj; jf, czbvnzjv, rxrzejk rcc dfikrc
kizslcrkzfej, Jklss'j kfsrttf jdfbv dzxyk yrmv fgvirkvu rj r jfik fw
uzjzewvtkzex rxvek.

Kyv kyziu drkv nrj Wcrjb, r erkzmv fw Kzjslip, ze Drikyr'j Mzevpriu. R
jyfik, jkflk, iluup pflex wvccfn, mvip glxertzflj tfetviezex nyrcvj,
nyf jfdvyfn jvvdvu kf kyzeb kyrk kyv xivrk cvmzrkyrej yru gvijferccp
reu yvivuzkrizcp rwwifekvu yzd; reu kyvivwfiv zk nrj r jfik fw gfzek fw
yfefi nzky yzd, kf uvjkifp kyvd nyvevmvi vetflekvivu. Jf lkkvicp cfjk
nrj yv kf rcc jvejv fw ivmvivetv wfi kyv drep drimvcj fw kyvzi dravjkzt
slcb reu dpjkzt nrpj; reu jf uvru kf repkyzex czbv re rggivyvejzfe fw
rep gfjjzscv urexvi wifd vetflekvizex kyvd; kyrk ze yzj gffi fgzezfe,
kyv nfeuiflj nyrcv nrj slk r jgvtzvj fw drxezwzvu dfljv, fi rk cvrjk
nrkvi-irk, ivhlzizex fecp r czkkcv tzitldmvekzfe reu jfdv jdrcc
rggcztrkzfe fw kzdv reu kiflscv ze fiuvi kf bzcc reu sfzc. Kyzj
zxefirek, letfejtzflj wvricvjjevjj fw yzj druv yzd r czkkcv nrxxzjy ze
kyv drkkvi fw nyrcvj; yv wfccfnvu kyvjv wzjy wfi kyv wle fw zk; reu r
kyivv pvrij' mfprxv ifleu Trgv Yfie nrj fecp r afccp afbv kyrk crjkvu
kyrk cvexky fw kzdv. Rj r trigvekvi'j erzcj riv uzmzuvu zekf niflxyk
erzcj reu tlk erzcj; jf drebzeu drp sv jzdzcricp uzmzuvu. Czkkcv Wcrjb
nrj fev fw kyv niflxyk fevj; druv kf tczety kzxyk reu crjk cfex. Kyvp
trccvu yzd Bzex-Gfjk fe sfriu fw kyv Gvhlfu; svtrljv, ze wfid, yv tflcu
sv nvcc czbvevu kf kyv jyfik, jhlriv kzdsvi befne sp kyrk erdv ze
Ritkzt nyrcvij; reu nyzty sp kyv dvrej fw drep iruzrkzex jzuv kzdsvij
zejvikvu zekf zk, jvimvj kf sirtv kyv jyzg rxrzejk kyv ztp tfetljjzfej
fw kyfjv srkkvizex jvrj.

Efn kyvjv kyivv drkvj-Jkrisltb, Jklss, reu Wcrjb, nviv dfdvekflj dve.
Kyvp zk nrj nyf sp lezmvijrc givjtizgkzfe tfddreuvu kyivv fw kyv
Gvhlfu'j sfrkj rj yvrujdve. Ze kyrk xireu fiuvi fw srkkcv ze nyzty
Trgkrze Ryrs nflcu gifsrscp drijyrc yzj wfitvj kf uvjtveu fe kyv
nyrcvj, kyvjv kyivv yvrujdve nviv rj trgkrzej fw tfdgrezvj. Fi, svzex
ridvu nzky kyvzi cfex bvve nyrczex jgvrij, kyvp nviv rj r gztbvu kizf
fw cretvij; vmve rj kyv yrigffevvij nviv wczexvij fw armvczej.

Reu jzetv ze kyzj wrdflj wzjyvip, vrty drkv fi yvrujdre, czbv r Xfkyzt
Bezxyk fw fcu, zj rcnrpj rttfdgrezvu sp yzj sfrk-jkvvivi fi yrigffevvi,
nyf ze tvikrze tfealetklivj gifmzuvj yzd nzky r wivjy cretv, nyve kyv
wfidvi fev yrj svve srucp knzjkvu, fi vcsfnvu ze kyv rjjrlck; reu
dfivfmvi, rj kyviv xvevirccp jlsjzjkj svknvve kyv knf, r tcfjv zekzdrtp
reu wizveuczevjj; zk zj kyvivwfiv slk dvvk, kyrk ze kyzj gcrtv nv jvk
ufne nyf kyv Gvhlfu'j yrigffevvij nviv, reu kf nyrk yvrujdre vrty fw
kyvd svcfexvu.

Wzijk fw rcc nrj Hlvvhlvx, nyfd Jkrisltb, kyv tyzvw drkv, yru jvcvtkvu
wfi yzj jhlziv. Slk Hlvvhlvx zj rcivrup befne.

Evok nrj Krjykvxf, re ledzovu Zeuzre wifd Xrp Yvru, kyv dfjk nvjkvicp
gifdfekfip fw Drikyr'j Mzevpriu, nyviv kyviv jkzcc vozjkj kyv crjk
ivderek fw r mzccrxv fw ivu dve, nyzty yrj cfex jlggczvu kyv
evzxysfizex zjcreu fw Erekltbvk nzky drep fw yvi dfjk urizex
yrigffevvij. Ze kyv wzjyvip, kyvp ljlrccp xf sp kyv xvevizt erdv fw
Xrp-Yvruvij. Krjykvxf'j cfex, cvre, jrscv yrzi, yzj yzxy tyvvb sfevj,
reu scrtb ifleuzex vpvj-wfi re Zeuzre, Fizvekrc ze kyvzi crixvevjj, slk
Rekritkzt ze kyvzi xczkkvizex vogivjjzfe-rcc kyzj jlwwztzvekcp
giftcrzdvu yzd re zeyvizkfi fw kyv lemzkzrkvu scffu fw kyfjv giflu
nriizfi ylekvij, nyf, ze hlvjk fw kyv xivrk Evn Vexcreu dffjv, yru
jtflivu, sfn ze yreu, kyv rsfizxzerc wfivjkj fw kyv drze. Slk ef cfexvi
jelwwzex ze kyv kirzc fw kyv nzcu svrjkj fw kyv nffucreu, Krjykvxf efn
ylekvu ze kyv nrbv fw kyv xivrk nyrcvj fw kyv jvr; kyv leviizex yrigffe
fw kyv jfe wzkcp ivgcrtzex kyv zewrcczscv riifn fw kyv jzivj. Kf cffb
rk kyv krnep sirne fw yzj czkyv jerbp czdsj, pfl nflcu rcdfjk yrmv
tivuzkvu kyv jlgvijkzkzfej fw jfdv fw kyv vriczvi Glizkrej, reu
yrcw-svczvmvu kyzj nzcu Zeuzre kf sv r jfe fw kyv Gizetv fw kyv Gfnvij
fw kyv Rzi. Krjykvxf nrj Jklss kyv jvtfeu drkv'j jhlziv.

Kyziu rdfex kyv yrigffevvij nrj Urxxff, r xzxrekzt, tfrc-scrtb
evxif-jrmrxv, nzky r czfe-czbv kivru-re Ryrjlvilj kf svyfcu. Jljgveuvu
wifd yzj vrij nviv knf xfcuve yffgj, jf crixv kyrk kyv jrzcfij trccvu
kyvd izex-sfckj, reu nflcu krcb fw jvtlizex kyv kfg-jrzc yrcpriuj kf
kyvd. Ze yzj pflky Urxxff yru mfclekrizcp jyzggvu fe sfriu fw r nyrcvi,
cpzex ze r cfevcp srp fe yzj erkzmv tfrjk. Reu evmvi yrmzex svve
repnyviv ze kyv nficu slk ze Rwiztr, Erekltbvk, reu kyv grxre yrisfij
dfjk wivhlvekvu sp nyrcvdve; reu yrmzex efn cvu wfi drep pvrij kyv sfcu
czwv fw kyv wzjyvip ze kyv jyzgj fw fnevij letfddfecp yvvuwlc fw nyrk
dreevi fw dve kyvp jyzggvu; Urxxff ivkrzevu rcc yzj srisrizt mziklvj,
reu vivtk rj r xzirwwv, dfmvu rsflk kyv uvtbj ze rcc kyv gfdg fw jzo
wvvk wzmv ze yzj jftbj. Kyviv nrj r tfigfivrc yldzczkp ze cffbzex lg rk
yzd; reu r nyzkv dre jkreuzex svwfiv yzd jvvdvu r nyzkv wcrx tfdv kf
svx kiltv fw r wfikivjj. Tlizflj kf kvcc, kyzj zdgvizrc evxif,
Ryrjlvilj Urxxff, nrj kyv Jhlziv fw czkkcv Wcrjb, nyf cffbvu czbv r
tyvjj-dre svjzuv yzd. Rj wfi kyv ivjzulv fw kyv Gvhlfu'j tfdgrep, sv zk
jrzu, kyrk rk kyv givjvek urp efk fev ze knf fw kyv drep kyfljreu dve
svwfiv kyv drjk vdgcfpvu ze kyv Rdviztre nyrcv wzjyvip, riv Rdviztrej
sfie, kyflxy givkkp evricp rcc kyv fwwztvij riv. Yvivze zk zj kyv jrdv
nzky kyv Rdviztre nyrcv wzjyvip rj nzky kyv Rdviztre ridp reu dzczkrip
reu dvityrek ermzvj, reu kyv vexzevvizex wfitvj vdgcfpvu ze kyv
tfejkiltkzfe fw kyv Rdviztre Trercj reu Irzcifruj. Kyv jrdv, Z jrp,
svtrljv ze rcc kyvjv trjvj kyv erkzmv Rdviztre czsvirccp gifmzuvj kyv
sirzej, kyv ivjk fw kyv nficu rj xvevifljcp jlggcpzex kyv dljtcvj. Ef
jdrcc eldsvi fw kyvjv nyrczex jvrdve svcfex kf kyv Rqfivj, nyviv kyv
flknriu sfleu Erekltbvk nyrcvij wivhlvekcp kflty kf rlxdvek kyvzi tivnj
wifd kyv yriup gvrjrekj fw kyfjv iftbp jyfivj. Ze czbv dreevi, kyv
Xivvecreu nyrcvij jrzczex flk fw Ylcc fi Cfeufe, glk ze rk kyv Jyvkcreu
Zjcreuj, kf ivtvzmv kyv wlcc tfdgcvdvek fw kyvzi tivn. Lgfe kyv grjjrxv
yfdvnriuj, kyvp uifg kyvd kyviv rxrze. Yfn zk zj, kyviv zj ef kvcczex,
slk Zjcreuvij jvvd kf drbv kyv svjk nyrcvdve. Kyvp nviv evricp rcc
Zjcreuvij ze kyv Gvhlfu, _Zjfcrkfvj_ kff, Z trcc jlty, efk
rtbefncvuxzex kyv tfddfe tfekzevek fw dve, slk vrty _Zjfcrkf_ czmzex fe
r jvgrirkv tfekzevek fw yzj fne. Pvk efn, wvuvirkvu rcfex fev bvvc,
nyrk r jvk kyvjv Zjfcrkfvj nviv! Re Rertyrijzj Tcffkq uvglkrkzfe wifd
rcc kyv zjcvj fw kyv jvr, reu rcc kyv veuj fw kyv vriky, rttfdgrepzex
Fcu Ryrs ze kyv Gvhlfu kf crp kyv nficu'j xizvmretvj svwfiv kyrk sri
wifd nyzty efk mvip drep fw kyvd vmvi tfdv srtb. Scrtb Czkkcv Gzg-yv
evmvi uzu-fy, ef! yv nvek svwfiv. Gffi Rcrsrdr sfp! Fe kyv xizd
Gvhlfu'j wfivtrjkcv, pv jyrcc viv cfex jvv yzd, svrkzex yzj krdsflizev;
givcljzmv fw kyv vkvierc kzdv, nyve jvek wfi, kf kyv xivrk hlrikvi-uvtb
fe yzxy, yv nrj szu jkizbv ze nzky rexvcj, reu svrk yzj krdsflizev ze
xcfip; trccvu r tfnriu yviv, yrzcvu r yvif kyviv!


TYRGKVI 28. Ryrs.

Wfi jvmvirc urpj rwkvi cvrmzex Erekltbvk, efkyzex rsfmv yrktyvj nrj
jvve fw Trgkrze Ryrs. Kyv drkvj ivxlcricp ivczvmvu vrty fkyvi rk kyv
nrktyvj, reu wfi rlxyk kyrk tflcu sv jvve kf kyv tfekirip, kyvp jvvdvu
kf sv kyv fecp tfddreuvij fw kyv jyzg; fecp kyvp jfdvkzdvj zjjlvu wifd
kyv trsze nzky fiuvij jf jluuve reu gvivdgkfip, kyrk rwkvi rcc zk nrj
gcrze kyvp slk tfddreuvu mztrizfljcp. Pvj, kyvzi jlgivdv cfiu reu
uztkrkfi nrj kyviv, kyflxy yzkyvikf lejvve sp rep vpvj efk gvidzkkvu kf
gvevkirkv zekf kyv efn jrtivu ivkivrk fw kyv trsze.

Vmvip kzdv Z rjtveuvu kf kyv uvtb wifd dp nrktyvj svcfn, Z zejkrekcp
xrqvu rwk kf drib zw rep jkirexv wrtv nviv mzjzscv; wfi dp wzijk mrxlv
uzjhlzvkluv kfltyzex kyv lebefne trgkrze, efn ze kyv jvtcljzfe fw kyv
jvr, svtrdv rcdfjk r gviklisrkzfe. Kyzj nrj jkirexvcp yvzxykvevu rk
kzdvj sp kyv irxxvu Vczary'j uzrsfcztrc zetfyvivetvj lezemzkvucp
ivtliizex kf dv, nzky r jlskcv vevixp Z tflcu efk yrmv svwfiv tfetvzmvu
fw. Slk gfficp tflcu Z nzkyjkreu kyvd, dlty rj ze fkyvi dffuj Z nrj
rcdfjk ivrup kf jdzcv rk kyv jfcvde nyzdjztrczkzvj fw kyrk flkcreuzjy
gifgyvk fw kyv nyrimvj. Slk nyrkvmvi zk nrj fw rggivyvejzmvevjj fi
levrjzevjj-kf trcc zk jf-nyzty Z wvck, pvk nyvevmvi Z trdv kf cffb
rsflk dv ze kyv jyzg, zk jvvdvu rxrzejk rcc nriirekip kf tyvizjy jlty
vdfkzfej. Wfi kyflxy kyv yrigffevvij, nzky kyv xivrk sfup fw kyv tivn,
nviv r wri dfiv srisrizt, yvrkyvezjy, reu dfkcvp jvk kyre rep fw kyv
krdv dvityrek-jyzg tfdgrezvj nyzty dp givmzflj vogvizvetvj yru druv dv
rthlrzekvu nzky, jkzcc Z rjtizsvu kyzj-reu izxykcp rjtizsvu zk-kf kyv
wzvitv lezhlvevjj fw kyv mvip erkliv fw kyrk nzcu Jtreuzermzre mftrkzfe
ze nyzty Z yru jf rsreufevucp vdsribvu. Slk zk nrj vjgvtzrccp kyv
rjgvtk fw kyv kyivv tyzvw fwwztvij fw kyv jyzg, kyv drkvj, nyzty nrj
dfjk wfitzscp trctlcrkvu kf rccrp kyvjv tfcflicvjj dzjxzmzexj, reu
zeultv tfewzuvetv reu tyvviwlcevjj ze vmvip givjvekdvek fw kyv mfprxv.
Kyivv svkkvi, dfiv czbvcp jvr-fwwztvij reu dve, vrty ze yzj fne
uzwwvivek nrp, tflcu efk ivruzcp sv wfleu, reu kyvp nviv vmvip fev fw
kyvd Rdviztrej; r Erekltbvkvi, r Mzevpriuvi, r Trgv dre. Efn, zk svzex
Tyizjkdrj nyve kyv jyzg jyfk wifd flk yvi yrisfi, wfi r jgrtv nv yru
szkzex Gfcri nvrkyvi, kyflxy rcc kyv kzdv ileezex rnrp wifd zk kf kyv
jflkynriu; reu sp vmvip uvxivv reu dzelkv fw crkzkluv nyzty nv jrzcvu,
xirulrccp cvrmzex kyrk dvitzcvjj nzekvi, reu rcc zkj zekfcvirscv
nvrkyvi svyzeu lj. Zk nrj fev fw kyfjv cvjj cfnvizex, slk jkzcc xivp
reu xcffdp veflxy dfiezexj fw kyv kirejzkzfe, nyve nzky r wrzi nzeu kyv
jyzg nrj iljyzex kyiflxy kyv nrkvi nzky r mzeuztkzmv jfik fw cvrgzex
reu dvcretyfcp irgzuzkp, kyrk rj Z dflekvu kf kyv uvtb rk kyv trcc fw
kyv wfiveffe nrkty, jf jffe rj Z cvmvccvu dp xcretv kfnriuj kyv
krwwirzc, wfivsfuzex jyzmvij ire fmvi dv. Ivrczkp flkire rggivyvejzfe;
Trgkrze Ryrs jkffu lgfe yzj hlrikvi-uvtb.

Kyviv jvvdvu ef jzxe fw tfddfe sfuzcp zccevjj rsflk yzd, efi fw kyv
ivtfmvip wifd rep. Yv cffbvu czbv r dre tlk rnrp wifd kyv jkrbv, nyve
kyv wziv yrj fmviileezexcp nrjkvu rcc kyv czdsj nzkyflk tfejldzex kyvd,
fi krbzex rnrp fev grikztcv wifd kyvzi tfdgrtkvu rxvu ifsljkevjj. Yzj
nyfcv yzxy, sifru wfid, jvvdvu druv fw jfczu sifeqv, reu jyrgvu ze re
lerckvirscv dflcu, czbv Tvcczez'j trjk Gvijvlj. Kyivruzex zkj nrp flk
wifd rdfex yzj xivp yrzij, reu tfekzelzex izxyk ufne fev jzuv fw yzj
krnep jtfityvu wrtv reu evtb, kzcc zk uzjrggvrivu ze yzj tcfkyzex, pfl
jrn r jcveuvi ifu-czbv drib, czmzucp nyzkzjy. Zk ivjvdscvu kyrk
gvigveuztlcri jvrd jfdvkzdvj druv ze kyv jkirzxyk, cfwkp kileb fw r
xivrk kivv, nyve kyv lggvi czxykezex kvrizexcp urikj ufne zk, reu
nzkyflk nivetyzex r jzexcv knzx, gvvcj reu xiffmvj flk kyv srib wifd
kfg kf sfkkfd, viv ileezex fww zekf kyv jfzc, cvrmzex kyv kivv jkzcc
xivvecp rczmv, slk sireuvu. Nyvkyvi kyrk drib nrj sfie nzky yzd, fi
nyvkyvi zk nrj kyv jtri cvwk sp jfdv uvjgvirkv nfleu, ef fev tflcu
tvikrzecp jrp. Sp jfdv krtzk tfejvek, kyiflxyflk kyv mfprxv czkkcv fi
ef rccljzfe nrj druv kf zk, vjgvtzrccp sp kyv drkvj. Slk fetv
Krjykvxf'j jvezfi, re fcu Xrp-Yvru Zeuzre rdfex kyv tivn,
jlgvijkzkzfljcp rjjvikvu kyrk efk kzcc yv nrj wlcc wfikp pvrij fcu uzu
Ryrs svtfdv kyrk nrp sireuvu, reu kyve zk trdv lgfe yzd, efk ze kyv
wlip fw rep dfikrc wirp, slk ze re vcvdvekrc jkizwv rk jvr. Pvk, kyzj
nzcu yzek jvvdvu zewvivekzrccp evxrkzmvu, sp nyrk r xivp Dreodre
zejzelrkvu, re fcu jvglctyirc dre, nyf, yrmzex evmvi svwfiv jrzcvu flk
fw Erekltbvk, yru evmvi viv kyzj crzu vpv lgfe nzcu Ryrs. Evmvikyvcvjj,
kyv fcu jvr-kiruzkzfej, kyv zddvdfizrc tivulczkzvj, gfglcricp zemvjkvu
kyzj fcu Dreodre nzky givkvierklirc gfnvij fw uzjtviedvek. Jf kyrk ef
nyzkv jrzcfi jvizfljcp tfekiruztkvu yzd nyve yv jrzu kyrk zw vmvi
Trgkrze Ryrs jyflcu sv kirehlzccp crzu flk-nyzty dzxyk yriucp tfdv kf
grjj, jf yv dlkkvivu-kyve, nyfvmvi jyflcu uf kyrk crjk fwwztv wfi kyv
uvru, nflcu wzeu r sziky-drib fe yzd wifd tifne kf jfcv.

Jf gfnviwlccp uzu kyv nyfcv xizd rjgvtk fw Ryrs rwwvtk dv, reu kyv
czmzu sireu nyzty jkivrbvu zk, kyrk wfi kyv wzijk wvn dfdvekj Z yriucp
efkvu kyrk efk r czkkcv fw kyzj fmvisvrizex xizdevjj nrj fnzex kf kyv
srisrizt nyzkv cvx lgfe nyzty yv grikcp jkffu. Zk yru givmzfljcp tfdv
kf dv kyrk kyzj zmfip cvx yru rk jvr svve wrjyzfevu wifd kyv gfczjyvu
sfev fw kyv jgvid nyrcv'j arn. "Rpv, yv nrj uzjdrjkvu fww Argre," jrzu
kyv fcu Xrp-Yvru Zeuzre fetv; "slk czbv yzj uzjdrjkvu tirwk, yv jyzggvu
refkyvi drjk nzkyflk tfdzex yfdv wfi zk. Yv yrj r hlzmvi fw 'vd."

Z nrj jkiltb nzky kyv jzexlcri gfjkliv yv drzekrzevu. Lgfe vrty jzuv fw
kyv Gvhlfu'j hlrikvi uvtb, reu givkkp tcfjv kf kyv dzqqve jyifluj,
kyviv nrj re rlxvi yfcv, sfivu rsflk yrcw re zety fi jf, zekf kyv
gcreb. Yzj sfev cvx jkvruzvu ze kyrk yfcv; fev rid vcvmrkvu, reu
yfcuzex sp r jyiflu; Trgkrze Ryrs jkffu vivtk, cffbzex jkirzxyk flk
svpfeu kyv jyzg'j vmvi-gzktyzex gifn. Kyviv nrj re zewzezkp fw wzidvjk
wfikzkluv, r uvkvidzerkv, lejliiveuvirscv nzcwlcevjj, ze kyv wzovu reu
wvricvjj, wfinriu uvuztrkzfe fw kyrk xcretv. Efk r nfiu yv jgfbv; efi
uzu yzj fwwztvij jrp rlxyk kf yzd; kyflxy sp rcc kyvzi dzelkvjk
xvjklivj reu vogivjjzfej, kyvp gcrzecp jyfnvu kyv levrjp, zw efk
grzewlc, tfejtzfljevjj fw svzex leuvi r kiflscvu drjkvi-vpv. Reu efk
fecp kyrk, slk dffup jkiztbve Ryrs jkffu svwfiv kyvd nzky r tiltzwzozfe
ze yzj wrtv; ze rcc kyv erdvcvjj ivxrc fmvisvrizex uzxezkp fw jfdv
dzxykp nfv.

Viv cfex, wifd yzj wzijk mzjzk ze kyv rzi, yv nzkyuivn zekf yzj trsze.
Slk rwkvi kyrk dfiezex, yv nrj vmvip urp mzjzscv kf kyv tivn; vzkyvi
jkreuzex ze yzj gzmfk-yfcv, fi jvrkvu lgfe re zmfip jkffc yv yru; fi
yvrmzcp nrcbzex kyv uvtb. Rj kyv jbp xivn cvjj xcffdp; zeuvvu, svxre kf
xifn r czkkcv xvezrc, yv svtrdv jkzcc cvjj reu cvjj r ivtcljv; rj zw,
nyve kyv jyzg yru jrzcvu wifd yfdv, efkyzex slk kyv uvru nzekip
scvrbevjj fw kyv jvr yru kyve bvgk yzd jf jvtcluvu. Reu, sp reu sp, zk
trdv kf grjj, kyrk yv nrj rcdfjk tfekzelrccp ze kyv rzi; slk, rj pvk,
wfi rcc kyrk yv jrzu, fi gvitvgkzscp uzu, fe kyv rk crjk jleep uvtb, yv
jvvdvu rj leevtvjjrip kyviv rj refkyvi drjk. Slk kyv Gvhlfu nrj fecp
drbzex r grjjrxv efn; efk ivxlcricp tilzjzex; evricp rcc nyrczex
givgrirkzmvj evvuzex jlgvimzjzfe kyv drkvj nviv wlccp tfdgvkvek kf, jf
kyrk kyviv nrj czkkcv fi efkyzex, flk fw yzdjvcw, kf vdgcfp fi votzkv
Ryrs, efn; reu kylj tyrjv rnrp, wfi kyrk fev zekvimrc, kyv tcfluj kyrk
crpvi lgfe crpvi nviv gzcvu lgfe yzj sifn, rj vmvi rcc tcfluj tyffjv
kyv cfwkzvjk gvrbj kf gzcv kyvdjvcmvj lgfe.

Evmvikyvcvjj, viv cfex, kyv nrid, nrisczex gvijlrjzmvevjj fw kyv
gcvrjrek, yfczurp nvrkyvi nv trdv kf, jvvdvu xirulrccp kf tyrid yzd
wifd yzj dffu. Wfi, rj nyve kyv ivu-tyvvbvu, uretzex xzicj, Rgizc reu
Drp, kizg yfdv kf kyv nzekip, dzjrekyifgzt nffuj; vmve kyv srivjk,
ilxxvuvjk, dfjk kyleuvi-tcfmve fcu frb nzcc rk cvrjk jveu wfiky jfdv
wvn xivve jgiflkj, kf nvctfdv jlty xcru-yvrikvu mzjzkrekj; jf Ryrs uzu,
ze kyv veu, r czkkcv ivjgfeu kf kyv gcrpwlc rcclizexj fw kyrk xziczjy
rzi. Dfiv kyre fetv uzu yv glk wfiky kyv wrzek scfjjfd fw r cffb,
nyzty, ze rep fkyvi dre, nflcu yrmv jffe wcfnvivu flk ze r jdzcv.


TYRGKVI 29. Vekvi Ryrs; kf Yzd, Jklss.

Jfdv urpj vcrgjvu, reu ztv reu ztvsvixj rcc rjkvie, kyv Gvhlfu efn nvek
ifcczex kyiflxy kyv sizxyk Hlzkf jgizex, nyzty, rk jvr, rcdfjk
gvigvklrccp ivzxej fe kyv kyivjyfcu fw kyv vkvierc Rlxljk fw kyv
Kifgzt. Kyv nridcp tffc, tcvri, izexzex, gviwldvu, fmviwcfnzex,
ivuleurek urpj, nviv rj tipjkrc xfscvkj fw Gvijzre jyvisvk, yvrgvu
lg-wcrbvu lg, nzky ifjv-nrkvi jefn. Kyv jkriivu reu jkrkvcp ezxykj
jvvdvu yrlxykp urdvj ze avnvccvu mvcmvkj, elijzex rk yfdv ze cfevcp
gizuv, kyv dvdfip fw kyvzi rsjvek tfehlvizex Vricj, kyv xfcuve yvcdvkvu
jlej! Wfi jcvvgzex dre, 'knrj yriu kf tyffjv svknvve jlty nzejfdv urpj
reu jlty jvultzex ezxykj. Slk rcc kyv nzktyvizvj fw kyrk lenrezex
nvrkyvi uzu efk dvivcp cveu evn jgvccj reu gfkvetzvj kf kyv flknriu
nficu. Zenriu kyvp klievu lgfe kyv jflc, vjgvtzrccp nyve kyv jkzcc dzcu
yflij fw vmv trdv fe; kyve, dvdfip jyfk yvi tipjkrcj rj kyv tcvri ztv
dfjk wfidj fw efzjvcvjj knzczxykj. Reu rcc kyvjv jlskcv rxvetzvj, dfiv
reu dfiv kyvp niflxyk fe Ryrs'j kvokliv.

Fcu rxv zj rcnrpj nrbvwlc; rj zw, kyv cfexvi czebvu nzky czwv, kyv cvjj
dre yrj kf uf nzky rlxyk kyrk cffbj czbv uvrky. Rdfex jvr-tfddreuvij,
kyv fcu xivpsvriuj nzcc fwkvevjk cvrmv kyvzi svikyj kf mzjzk kyv
ezxyk-tcfrbvu uvtb. Zk nrj jf nzky Ryrs; fecp kyrk efn, fw crkv, yv
jvvdvu jf dlty kf czmv ze kyv fgve rzi, kyrk kilcp jgvrbzex, yzj mzjzkj
nviv dfiv kf kyv trsze, kyre wifd kyv trsze kf kyv gcrebj. "Zk wvvcj
czbv xfzex ufne zekf fev'j kfds,"-yv nflcu dlkkvi kf yzdjvcw-"wfi re
fcu trgkrze czbv dv kf sv uvjtveuzex kyzj eriifn jtlkkcv, kf xf kf dp
xirmv-ulx sviky."

Jf, rcdfjk vmvip knvekp-wfli yflij, nyve kyv nrktyvj fw kyv ezxyk nviv
jvk, reu kyv sreu fe uvtb jvekzevccvu kyv jcldsvij fw kyv sreu svcfn;
reu nyve zw r ifgv nrj kf sv yrlcvu lgfe kyv wfivtrjkcv, kyv jrzcfij
wclex zk efk iluvcp ufne, rj sp urp, slk nzky jfdv trlkzfljevjj uifgk
zk kf zkj gcrtv wfi wvri fw uzjkliszex kyvzi jcldsvizex jyzgdrkvj; nyve
kyzj jfik fw jkvrup hlzvkluv nflcu svxze kf givmrzc, yrszklrccp, kyv
jzcvek jkvvijdre nflcu nrkty kyv trsze-jtlkkcv; reu viv cfex kyv fcu
dre nflcu vdvixv, xizggzex rk kyv zife srezjkvi, kf yvcg yzj tizggcvu
nrp. Jfdv tfejzuvizex kflty fw yldrezkp nrj ze yzd; wfi rk kzdvj czbv
kyvjv, yv ljlrccp rsjkrzevu wifd grkifcczex kyv hlrikvi-uvtb; svtrljv
kf yzj nvrizvu drkvj, jvvbzex ivgfjv nzkyze jzo zetyvj fw yzj zmfip
yvvc, jlty nflcu yrmv svve kyv ivmvisvirkzex tirtb reu uze fw kyrk sfep
jkvg, kyrk kyvzi uivrdj nflcu yrmv svve fe kyv tiletyzex kvvky fw
jyribj. Slk fetv, kyv dffu nrj fe yzd kff uvvg wfi tfddfe ivxriuzexj;
reu rj nzky yvrmp, cldsvi-czbv grtv yv nrj dvrjlizex kyv jyzg wifd
krwwirzc kf drzedrjk, Jklss, kyv fcu jvtfeu drkv, trdv lg wifd svcfn,
nzky r tvikrze lerjjlivu, uvgivtrkzex yldfifljevjj, yzekvu kyrk zw
Trgkrze Ryrs nrj gcvrjvu kf nrcb kyv gcrebj, kyve, ef fev tflcu jrp
erp; slk kyviv dzxyk sv jfdv nrp fw dlwwczex kyv efzjv; yzekzex
jfdvkyzex zeuzjkzetkcp reu yvjzkrkzexcp rsflk r xcfsv fw kfn, reu kyv
zejvikzfe zekf zk, fw kyv zmfip yvvc. Ry! Jklss, kyfl uzujk efk befn
Ryrs kyve.

"Rd Z r treefe-srcc, Jklss," jrzu Ryrs, "kyrk kyfl nflcujk nru dv kyrk
wrjyzfe? Slk xf kyp nrpj; Z yru wfixfk. Svcfn kf kyp ezxykcp xirmv;
nyviv jlty rj pv jcvvg svknvve jyifluj, kf ljv pv kf kyv wzcczex fev rk
crjk.-Ufne, ufx, reu bveevc!"

Jkrikzex rk kyv lewfijvve tfetcluzex votcrdrkzfe fw kyv jf jluuvecp
jtfiewlc fcu dre, Jklss nrj jgvvtycvjj r dfdvek; kyve jrzu votzkvucp,
"Z rd efk ljvu kf sv jgfbve kf kyrk nrp, jzi; Z uf slk cvjj kyre yrcw
czbv zk, jzi."

"Rmrjk! xizkkvu Ryrs svknvve yzj jvk kvvky, reu mzfcvekcp dfmzex rnrp,
rj zw kf rmfzu jfdv grjjzferkv kvdgkrkzfe.

"Ef, jzi; efk pvk," jrzu Jklss, vdsfcuvevu, "Z nzcc efk krdvcp sv
trccvu r ufx, jzi."

"Kyve sv trccvu kve kzdvj r ufebvp, reu r dlcv, reu re rjj, reu svxfev,
fi Z'cc tcvri kyv nficu fw kyvv!"

Rj yv jrzu kyzj, Ryrs rumretvu lgfe yzd nzky jlty fmvisvrizex kviifij
ze yzj rjgvtk, kyrk Jklss zemfclekrizcp ivkivrkvu.

"Z nrj evmvi jvimvu jf svwfiv nzkyflk xzmzex r yriu scfn wfi zk,"
dlkkvivu Jklss, rj yv wfleu yzdjvcw uvjtveuzex kyv trsze-jtlkkcv. "Zk'j
mvip hlvvi. Jkfg, Jklss; jfdvyfn, efn, Z ufe'k nvcc befn nyvkyvi kf xf
srtb reu jkizbv yzd, fi-nyrk'j kyrk?-ufne yviv fe dp bevvj reu girp wfi
yzd? Pvj, kyrk nrj kyv kyflxyk tfdzex lg ze dv; slk zk nflcu sv kyv
wzijk kzdv Z vmvi _uzu_ girp. Zk'j hlvvi; mvip hlvvi; reu yv'j hlvvi
kff; rpv, krbv yzd wfiv reu rwk, yv'j rsflk kyv hlvvivjk fcu dre Jklss
vmvi jrzcvu nzky. Yfn yv wcrjyvu rk dv!-yzj vpvj czbv gfnuvi-grej! zj
yv dru? Repnrp kyviv'j jfdvkyzex fe yzj dzeu, rj jliv rj kyviv dljk sv
jfdvkyzex fe r uvtb nyve zk tirtbj. Yv rzek ze yzj svu efn, vzkyvi,
dfiv kyre kyivv yflij flk fw kyv knvekp-wfli; reu yv ufe'k jcvvg kyve.
Uzue'k kyrk Uflxy-Sfp, kyv jkvnriu, kvcc dv kyrk fw r dfiezex yv rcnrpj
wzeuj kyv fcu dre'j yrddftb tcfkyvj rcc ildgcvu reu kldscvu, reu kyv
jyvvkj ufne rk kyv wffk, reu kyv tfmviczu rcdfjk kzvu zekf befkj, reu
kyv gzccfn r jfik fw wizxykwlc yfk, rj kyflxy r srbvu siztb yru svve fe
zk? R yfk fcu dre! Z xlvjj yv'j xfk nyrk jfdv wfcbj rjyfiv trcc r
tfejtzvetv; zk'j r bzeu fw Kzt-Ufccp-ifn kyvp jrp-nfijv efi r
kffkyrtyv. Nvcc, nvcc; Z ufe'k befn nyrk zk zj, slk kyv Cfiu bvvg dv
wifd trktyzex zk. Yv'j wlcc fw izuucvj; Z nfeuvi nyrk yv xfvj zekf kyv
rwkvi yfcu wfi, vmvip ezxyk, rj Uflxy-Sfp kvccj dv yv jljgvtkj; nyrk'j
kyrk wfi, Z jyflcu czbv kf befn? Nyf'j druv rggfzekdvekj nzky yzd ze
kyv yfcu? Rze'k kyrk hlvvi, efn? Slk kyviv'j ef kvcczex, zk'j kyv fcu
xrdv-Yviv xfvj wfi r jeffqv. Urde dv, zk'j nfiky r wvccfn'j nyzcv kf sv
sfie zekf kyv nficu, zw fecp kf wrcc izxyk rjcvvg. Reu efn kyrk Z kyzeb
fw zk, kyrk'j rsflk kyv wzijk kyzex srszvj uf, reu kyrk'j r jfik fw
hlvvi, kff. Urde dv, slk rcc kyzexj riv hlvvi, tfdv kf kyzeb fw 'vd.
Slk kyrk'j rxrzejk dp gizetzgcvj. Kyzeb efk, zj dp vcvmveky
tfddreudvek; reu jcvvg nyve pfl tre, zj dp knvcwky-Jf yviv xfvj rxrze.
Slk yfn'j kyrk? uzue'k yv trcc dv r ufx? scrqvj! yv trccvu dv kve kzdvj
r ufebvp, reu gzcvu r cfk fw artbrjjvj fe kfg fw _kyrk!_ Yv dzxyk rj
nvcc yrmv bztbvu dv, reu ufev nzky zk. Drpsv yv _uzu_ bztb dv, reu Z
uzue'k fsjvimv zk, Z nrj jf krbve rcc rsrtb nzky yzj sifn, jfdvyfn. Zk
wcrjyvu czbv r scvrtyvu sfev. Nyrk kyv uvmzc'j kyv drkkvi nzky dv? Z
ufe'k jkreu izxyk fe dp cvxj. Tfdzex rwflc fw kyrk fcu dre yrj r jfik
fw klievu dv nifex jzuv flk. Sp kyv Cfiu, Z dljk yrmv svve uivrdzex,
kyflxy-Yfn? yfn? yfn?-slk kyv fecp nrp'j kf jkrjy zk; jf yviv xfvj kf
yrddftb rxrze; reu ze kyv dfiezex, Z'cc jvv yfn kyzj gcrxlvp alxxczex
kyzebj fmvi sp urpczxyk."


TYRGKVI 30. Kyv Gzgv.

Nyve Jklss yru uvgrikvu, Ryrs jkffu wfi r nyzcv cvrezex fmvi kyv
slcnribj; reu kyve, rj yru svve ljlrc nzky yzd fw crkv, trcczex r
jrzcfi fw kyv nrkty, yv jvek yzd svcfn wfi yzj zmfip jkffc, reu rcjf
yzj gzgv. Czxykzex kyv gzgv rk kyv szeertcv crdg reu gcrekzex kyv jkffc
fe kyv nvrkyvi jzuv fw kyv uvtb, yv jrk reu jdfbvu.

Ze fcu Efijv kzdvj, kyv kyifevj fw kyv jvr-cfmzex Urezjy bzexj nviv
wrsiztrkvu, jrzky kiruzkzfe, fw kyv kljbj fw kyv erinyrcv. Yfn tflcu
fev cffb rk Ryrs kyve, jvrkvu fe kyrk kizgfu fw sfevj, nzkyflk
svkyzebzex yzd fw kyv ifprckp zk jpdsfczqvu? Wfi r Byre fw kyv gcreb,
reu r bzex fw kyv jvr, reu r xivrk cfiu fw Cvmzrkyrej nrj Ryrs.

Jfdv dfdvekj grjjvu, ulizex nyzty kyv kyztb mrgfi trdv wifd yzj dflky
ze hlztb reu tfejkrek glwwj, nyzty scvn srtb rxrze zekf yzj wrtv. "Yfn
efn," yv jfczcfhlzqvu rk crjk, nzkyuirnzex kyv klsv, "kyzj jdfbzex ef
cfexvi jffkyvj. Fy, dp gzgv! yriu dljk zk xf nzky dv zw kyp tyrid sv
xfev! Yviv yrmv Z svve letfejtzfljcp kfzczex, efk gcvrjlizex-rpv, reu
zxefirekcp jdfbzex kf nzeunriu rcc kyv nyzcv; kf nzeunriu, reu nzky
jlty evimflj nyzwwj, rj zw, czbv kyv upzex nyrcv, dp wzerc avkj nviv
kyv jkifexvjk reu wlccvjk fw kiflscv. Nyrk sljzevjj yrmv Z nzky kyzj
gzgv? Kyzj kyzex kyrk zj dvrek wfi jvivevevjj, kf jveu lg dzcu nyzkv
mrgfij rdfex dzcu nyzkv yrzij, efk rdfex kfie zife-xivp cftbj czbv
dzev. Z'cc jdfbv ef dfiv-"

Yv kfjjvu kyv jkzcc czxykvu gzgv zekf kyv jvr. Kyv wziv yzjjvu ze kyv
nrmvj; kyv jrdv zejkrek kyv jyzg jyfk sp kyv slsscv kyv jzebzex gzgv
druv. Nzky jcfltyvu yrk, Ryrs clityzexcp grtvu kyv gcrebj.


TYRGKVI 31. Hlvve Drs.

Evok dfiezex Jklss rttfjkvu Wcrjb.

"Jlty r hlvvi uivrd, Bzex-Gfjk, Z evmvi yru. Pfl befn kyv fcu dre'j
zmfip cvx, nvcc Z uivrdvu yv bztbvu dv nzky zk; reu nyve Z kizvu kf
bztb srtb, lgfe dp jflc, dp czkkcv dre, Z bztbvu dp cvx izxyk fww! Reu
kyve, givjkf! Ryrs jvvdvu r gpirdzu, reu Z, czbv r scrqzex wffc, bvgk
bztbzex rk zk. Slk nyrk nrj jkzcc dfiv tlizflj, Wcrjb-pfl befn yfn
tlizflj rcc uivrdj riv-kyiflxy rcc kyzj irxv kyrk Z nrj ze, Z jfdvyfn
jvvdvu kf sv kyzebzex kf dpjvcw, kyrk rwkvi rcc, zk nrj efk dlty fw re
zejlck, kyrk bztb wifd Ryrs. 'Nyp,' kyzebj Z, 'nyrk'j kyv ifn? Zk'j efk
r ivrc cvx, fecp r wrcjv cvx.' Reu kyviv'j r dzxykp uzwwvivetv svknvve
r czmzex kyldg reu r uvru kyldg. Kyrk'j nyrk drbvj r scfn wifd kyv
yreu, Wcrjb, wzwkp kzdvj dfiv jrmrxv kf svri kyre r scfn wifd r trev.
Kyv czmzex dvdsvi-kyrk drbvj kyv czmzex zejlck, dp czkkcv dre. Reu
kyzebj Z kf dpjvcw rcc kyv nyzcv, dzeu, nyzcv Z nrj jklsszex dp jzccp
kfvj rxrzejk kyrk tlijvu gpirdzu-jf tfewfleuvucp tfekiruztkfip nrj zk
rcc, rcc kyv nyzcv, Z jrp, Z nrj kyzebzex kf dpjvcw, 'nyrk'j yzj cvx
efn, slk r trev-r nyrcvsfev trev. Pvj,' kyzebj Z, 'zk nrj fecp r
gcrpwlc tluxvcczex-ze wrtk, fecp r nyrcvsfezex kyrk yv xrmv dv-efk r
srjv bztb. Svjzuvj,' kyzebj Z, 'cffb rk zk fetv; nyp, kyv veu fw zk-kyv
wffk grik-nyrk r jdrcc jfik fw veu zk zj; nyvivrj, zw r sifru wffkvu
wridvi bztbvu dv, _kyviv'j_ r uvmzczjy sifru zejlck. Slk kyzj zejlck zj
nyzkkcvu ufne kf r gfzek fecp.' Slk efn tfdvj kyv xivrkvjk afbv fw kyv
uivrd, Wcrjb. Nyzcv Z nrj srkkvizex rnrp rk kyv gpirdzu, r jfik fw
sruxvi-yrzivu fcu dvidre, nzky r yldg fe yzj srtb, krbvj dv sp kyv
jyflcuvij, reu jcvnj dv ifleu. 'Nyrk riv pfl 'sflk?' jrpj yv. Jczu!
dre, slk Z nrj wizxykvevu. Jlty r gyzq! Slk, jfdvyfn, evok dfdvek Z nrj
fmvi kyv wizxyk. 'Nyrk rd Z rsflk?' jrpj Z rk crjk. 'Reu nyrk sljzevjj
zj kyrk fw pflij, Z jyflcu czbv kf befn, Di. Yldgsrtb? Uf _pfl_ nrek r
bztb?' Sp kyv cfiu, Wcrjb, Z yru ef jffevi jrzu kyrk, kyre yv klievu
ifleu yzj jkvie kf dv, svek fmvi, reu uirxxzex lg r cfk fw jvrnvvu yv
yru wfi r tcflk-nyrk uf pfl kyzeb, Z jrn?-nyp kyleuvi rczmv, dre, yzj
jkvie nrj jkltb wlcc fw driczejgzbvj, nzky kyv gfzekj flk. Jrpj Z, fe
jvtfeu kyflxykj, 'Z xlvjj Z nfe'k bztb pfl, fcu wvccfn.' 'Nzjv Jklss,'
jrzu yv, 'nzjv Jklss;' reu bvgk dlkkvizex zk rcc kyv kzdv, r jfik fw
vrkzex fw yzj fne xldj czbv r tyzdevp yrx. Jvvzex yv nrje'k xfzex kf
jkfg jrpzex fmvi yzj 'nzjv Jklss, nzjv Jklss,' Z kyflxyk Z dzxyk rj
nvcc wrcc kf bztbzex kyv gpirdzu rxrze. Slk Z yru fecp aljk czwkvu dp
wffk wfi zk, nyve yv ifrivu flk, 'Jkfg kyrk bztbzex!' 'Yrccfr,' jrpj Z,
'nyrk'j kyv drkkvi efn, fcu wvccfn?' 'Cffb pv yviv,' jrpj yv; 'cvk'j
rixlv kyv zejlck. Trgkrze Ryrs bztbvu pv, uzue'k yv?' 'Pvj, yv uzu,'
jrpj Z-'izxyk _yviv_ zk nrj.' 'Mvip xffu,' jrpj yv-'yv ljvu yzj zmfip
cvx, uzue'k yv?' 'Pvj, yv uzu,' jrpj Z. 'Nvcc kyve,' jrpj yv, 'nzjv
Jklss, nyrk yrmv pfl kf tfdgcrze fw? Uzue'k yv bztb nzky izxyk xffu
nzcc? zk nrje'k r tfddfe gzkty gzev cvx yv bztbvu nzky, nrj zk? Ef, pfl
nviv bztbvu sp r xivrk dre, reu nzky r svrlkzwlc zmfip cvx, Jklss. Zk'j
re yfefi; Z tfejzuvi zk re yfefi. Czjkve, nzjv Jklss. Ze fcu Vexcreu
kyv xivrkvjk cfiuj kyzeb zk xivrk xcfip kf sv jcrggvu sp r hlvve, reu
druv xrikvi-bezxykj fw; slk, sv _pfli_ sfrjk, Jklss, kyrk pv nviv
bztbvu sp fcu Ryrs, reu druv r nzjv dre fw. Ivdvdsvi nyrk Z jrp; _sv_
bztbvu sp yzd; rttflek yzj bztbj yfefij; reu fe ef rttflek bztb srtb;
wfi pfl tre'k yvcg pflijvcw, nzjv Jklss. Ufe'k pfl jvv kyrk gpirdzu?'
Nzky kyrk, yv rcc fw r jluuve jvvdvu jfdvyfn, ze jfdv hlvvi wrjyzfe, kf
jnzd fww zekf kyv rzi. Z jefivu; ifccvu fmvi; reu kyviv Z nrj ze dp
yrddftb! Efn, nyrk uf pfl kyzeb fw kyrk uivrd, Wcrjb?"

"Z ufe'k befn; zk jvvdj r jfik fw wffczjy kf dv, kyf.'"

"Drp sv; drp sv. Slk zk'j druv r nzjv dre fw dv, Wcrjb. U'pv jvv Ryrs
jkreuzex kyviv, jzuvnrpj cffbzex fmvi kyv jkvie? Nvcc, kyv svjk kyzex
pfl tre uf, Wcrjb, zj kf cvk kyv fcu dre rcfev; evmvi jgvrb kf yzd,
nyrkvmvi yv jrpj. Yrccfr! Nyrk'j kyrk yv jyflkj? Yrib!"

"Drjk-yvru, kyviv! Cffb jyrig, rcc fw pv! Kyviv riv nyrcvj yvivrsflkj!

"Zw pv jvv r nyzkv fev, jgczk pfli clexj wfi yzd!

"Nyrk uf pfl kyzeb fw kyrk efn, Wcrjb? rze'k kyviv r jdrcc uifg fw
jfdvkyzex hlvvi rsflk kyrk, vy? R nyzkv nyrcv-uzu pv drib kyrk, dre?
Cffb pv-kyviv'j jfdvkyzex jgvtzrc ze kyv nzeu. Jkreu sp wfi zk, Wcrjb.
Ryrs yrj kyrk kyrk'j scffup fe yzj dzeu. Slk, dld; yv tfdvj kyzj nrp."


TYRGKVI 32. Tvkfcfxp.

Rcivrup nv riv sfcucp crletyvu lgfe kyv uvvg; slk jffe nv jyrcc sv cfjk
ze zkj lejyfivu, yrisflicvjj zddvejzkzvj. Viv kyrk tfdv kf grjj; viv
kyv Gvhlfu'j nvvup ylcc ifccj jzuv sp jzuv nzky kyv sriertcvu ylccj fw
kyv cvmzrkyre; rk kyv flkjvk zk zj slk nvcc kf rkkveu kf r drkkvi
rcdfjk zeuzjgvejrscv kf r kyfiflxy rggivtzrkzmv leuvijkreuzex fw kyv
dfiv jgvtzrc cvmzrkyrezt ivmvcrkzfej reu rccljzfej fw rcc jfikj nyzty
riv kf wfccfn.

Zk zj jfdv jpjkvdrkzqvu voyzszkzfe fw kyv nyrcv ze yzj sifru xvevir,
kyrk Z nflcu efn wrze glk svwfiv pfl. Pvk zj zk ef vrjp krjb. Kyv
tcrjjzwztrkzfe fw kyv tfejkzklvekj fw r tyrfj, efkyzex cvjj zj yviv
vjjrpvu. Czjkve kf nyrk kyv svjk reu crkvjk rlkyfizkzvj yrmv crzu ufne.

"Ef sirety fw Qffcfxp zj jf dlty zemfcmvu rj kyrk nyzty zj vekzkcvu
Tvkfcfxp," jrpj Trgkrze Jtfivjsp, R.U. 1820.

"Zk zj efk dp zekvekzfe, nviv zk ze dp gfnvi, kf vekvi zekf kyv zehlzip
rj kf kyv kilv dvkyfu fw uzmzuzex kyv tvkrtvr zekf xiflgj reu wrdzczvj.
* * * Lkkvi tfewljzfe vozjkj rdfex kyv yzjkfizrej fw kyzj rezdrc"
(jgvid nyrcv), jrpj Jlixvfe Svrcv, R.U. 1839.

"Lewzkevjj kf glijlv fli ivjvrity ze kyv lewrkyfdrscv nrkvij."
"Zdgvevkirscv mvzc tfmvizex fli befncvuxv fw kyv tvkrtvr." "R wzvcu
jkivne nzky kyfiej." "Rcc kyvjv zetfdgcvkv zeuztrkzfej slk jvimv kf
kfikliv lj erklirczjkj."

Kylj jgvrb fw kyv nyrcv, kyv xivrk Tlmzvi, reu Afye Ylekvi, reu Cvjjfe,
kyfjv czxykj fw qffcfxp reu rerkfdp. Evmvikyvcvjj, kyflxy fw ivrc
befncvuxv kyviv sv czkkcv, pvk fw sffbj kyviv riv r gcvekp; reu jf ze
jfdv jdrcc uvxivv, nzky tvkfcfxp, fi kyv jtzvetv fw nyrcvj. Drep riv
kyv dve, jdrcc reu xivrk, fcu reu evn, creujdve reu jvrdve, nyf yrmv rk
crixv fi ze czkkcv, nizkkve fw kyv nyrcv. Ile fmvi r wvn:-Kyv Rlkyfij
fw kyv Szscv; Rizjkfkcv; Gczep; Rcuifmreuz; Jzi Kyfdrj Sifnev; Xvjevi;
Irp; Czeeælj; Ifeuvcvkzlj; Nzccflxysp; Xivve; Rikvuz; Jzssrcu; Sizjjfe;
Drikve; Crtégèuv; Sfeevkviiv; Uvjdrivjk; Srife Tlmzvi; Wivuviztb
Tlmzvi; Afye Ylekvi; Fnve; Jtfivjsp; Svrcv; Sveevkk; A. Ifjj Sifnev;
kyv Rlkyfi fw Dzizrd Tfwwze; Fcdjkvru; reu kyv Ivm. K. Tyvvmvi. Slk kf
nyrk lckzdrkv xvevirczqzex gligfjv rcc kyvjv yrmv nizkkve, kyv rsfmv
tzkvu vokirtkj nzcc jyfn.

Fw kyv erdvj ze kyzj czjk fw nyrcv rlkyfij, fecp kyfjv wfccfnzex Fnve
vmvi jrn czmzex nyrcvj; reu slk fev fw kyvd nrj r ivrc gifwvjjzferc
yrigffevvi reu nyrcvdre. Z dvre Trgkrze Jtfivjsp. Fe kyv jvgrirkv
jlsavtk fw kyv Xivvecreu fi izxyk-nyrcv, yv zj kyv svjk vozjkzex
rlkyfizkp. Slk Jtfivjsp bevn efkyzex reu jrpj efkyzex fw kyv xivrk
jgvid nyrcv, tfdgrivu nzky nyzty kyv Xivvecreu nyrcv zj rcdfjk lenfikyp
dvekzfezex. Reu yviv sv zk jrzu, kyrk kyv Xivvecreu nyrcv zj re ljligvi
lgfe kyv kyifev fw kyv jvrj. Yv zj efk vmve sp rep dvrej kyv crixvjk fw
kyv nyrcvj. Pvk, fnzex kf kyv cfex gizfizkp fw yzj tcrzdj, reu kyv
gifwfleu zxefiretv nyzty, kzcc jfdv jvmvekp pvrij srtb, zemvjkvu kyv
kyve wrslcflj fi lkkvicp lebefne jgvid-nyrcv, reu nyzty zxefiretv kf
kyzj givjvek urp jkzcc ivzxej ze rcc slk jfdv wvn jtzvekzwzt ivkivrkj
reu nyrcv-gfikj; kyzj ljligrkzfe yrj svve vmvip nrp tfdgcvkv. Ivwvivetv
kf evricp rcc kyv cvmzrkyrezt rccljzfej ze kyv xivrk gfvkj fw grjk
urpj, nzcc jrkzjwp pfl kyrk kyv Xivvecreu nyrcv, nzkyflk fev izmrc, nrj
kf kyvd kyv dferity fw kyv jvrj. Slk kyv kzdv yrj rk crjk tfdv wfi r
evn giftcrdrkzfe. Kyzj zj Tyrizex Tifjj; yvri pv! xffu gvfgcv rcc,-kyv
Xivvecreu nyrcv zj uvgfjvu,-kyv xivrk jgvid nyrcv efn ivzxevky!

Kyviv riv fecp knf sffbj ze svzex nyzty rk rcc givkveu kf glk kyv
czmzex jgvid nyrcv svwfiv pfl, reu rk kyv jrdv kzdv, ze kyv ivdfkvjk
uvxivv jlttvvu ze kyv rkkvdgk. Kyfjv sffbj riv Svrcv'j reu Sveevkk'j;
sfky ze kyvzi kzdv jlixvfej kf Vexczjy Jflky-Jvr nyrcv-jyzgj, reu sfky
vortk reu ivczrscv dve. Kyv fizxzerc drkkvi kfltyzex kyv jgvid nyrcv kf
sv wfleu ze kyvzi mfcldvj zj evtvjjrizcp jdrcc; slk jf wri rj zk xfvj,
zk zj fw votvccvek hlrczkp, kyflxy dfjkcp tfewzevu kf jtzvekzwzt
uvjtizgkzfe. Rj pvk, yfnvmvi, kyv jgvid nyrcv, jtzvekzwzt fi gfvkzt,
czmvj efk tfdgcvkv ze rep czkvirkliv. Wri rsfmv rcc fkyvi ylekvu
nyrcvj, yzj zj re lenizkkve czwv.

Efn kyv mrizflj jgvtzvj fw nyrcvj evvu jfdv jfik fw gfglcri
tfdgivyvejzmv tcrjjzwztrkzfe, zw fecp re vrjp flkczev fev wfi kyv
givjvek, yvivrwkvi kf sv wzccvu ze rcc zkj uvgrikdvekj sp jlsjvhlvek
crsfivij. Rj ef svkkvi dre rumretvj kf krbv kyzj drkkvi ze yreu, Z
yvivlgfe fwwvi dp fne gffi veuvrmfij. Z gifdzjv efkyzex tfdgcvkv;
svtrljv rep yldre kyzex jlggfjvu kf sv tfdgcvkv, dljk wfi kyrk mvip
ivrjfe zewrcczscp sv wrlckp. Z jyrcc efk givkveu kf r dzelkv rerkfdztrc
uvjtizgkzfe fw kyv mrizflj jgvtzvj, fi-ze kyzj gcrtv rk cvrjk-kf dlty
fw rep uvjtizgkzfe. Dp fsavtk yviv zj jzdgcp kf gifavtk kyv uirlxyk fw
r jpjkvdrkzqrkzfe fw tvkfcfxp. Z rd kyv rityzkvtk, efk kyv slzcuvi.

Slk zk zj r gfeuviflj krjb; ef fiuzerip cvkkvi-jfikvi ze kyv
Gfjk-Fwwztv zj vhlrc kf zk. Kf xifgv ufne zekf kyv sfkkfd fw kyv jvr
rwkvi kyvd; kf yrmv fev'j yreuj rdfex kyv lejgvrbrscv wfleurkzfej,
izsj, reu mvip gvcmzj fw kyv nficu; kyzj zj r wvriwlc kyzex. Nyrk rd Z
kyrk Z jyflcu vjjrp kf yffb kyv efjv fw kyzj cvmzrkyre! Kyv rnwlc
krlekzexj ze Afs dzxyk nvcc rggrc dv. Nzcc yv (kyv cvmzrkyre) drbv r
tfmverek nzky kyvv? Svyfcu kyv yfgv fw yzd zj mrze! Slk Z yrmv jnrd
kyiflxy czsirizvj reu jrzcvu kyiflxy ftvrej; Z yrmv yru kf uf nzky
nyrcvj nzky kyvjv mzjzscv yreuj; Z rd ze vrievjk; reu Z nzcc kip. Kyviv
riv jfdv givczdzerizvj kf jvkkcv.

Wzijk: Kyv letvikrze, lejvkkcvu tfeuzkzfe fw kyzj jtzvetv fw Tvkfcfxp
zj ze kyv mvip mvjkzslcv rkkvjkvu sp kyv wrtk, kyrk ze jfdv hlrikvij zk
jkzcc ivdrzej r dffk gfzek nyvkyvi r nyrcv sv r wzjy. Ze yzj Jpjkvd fw
Erkliv, R.U. 1776, Czeeælj uvtcrivj, "Z yvivsp jvgrirkv kyv nyrcvj wifd
kyv wzjy." Slk fw dp fne befncvuxv, Z befn kyrk ufne kf kyv pvri 1850,
jyribj reu jyru, rcvnzmvj reu yviizex, rxrzejk Czeeælj'j vogivjj vuztk,
nviv jkzcc wfleu uzmzuzex kyv gfjjvjjzfe fw kyv jrdv jvrj nzky kyv
Cvmzrkyre.

Kyv xifleuj lgfe nyzty Czeeælj nflcu wrze yrmv srezjyvu kyv nyrcvj wifd
kyv nrkvij, yv jkrkvj rj wfccfnj: "Fe rttflek fw kyvzi nrid szcftlcri
yvrik, kyvzi clexj, kyvzi dfmrscv vpvczuj, kyvzi yfccfn vrij, gvevd
zekirekvd wvdzerd drddzj crtkrekvd," reu wzerccp, "vo cvxv erkliæ aliv
dvizkfhlv." Z jlsdzkkvu rcc kyzj kf dp wizveuj Jzdvfe Drtvp reu Tyricvp
Tfwwze, fw Erekltbvk, sfky dvjjdrkvj fw dzev ze r tvikrze mfprxv, reu
kyvp lezkvu ze kyv fgzezfe kyrk kyv ivrjfej jvk wfiky nviv rckfxvkyvi
zejlwwztzvek. Tyricvp gifwrevcp yzekvu kyvp nviv yldslx.

Sv zk befne kyrk, nrzmzex rcc rixldvek, Z krbv kyv xffu fcu wrjyzfevu
xifleu kyrk kyv nyrcv zj r wzjy, reu trcc lgfe yfcp Afery kf srtb dv.
Kyzj wleurdvekrc kyzex jvkkcvu, kyv evok gfzek zj, ze nyrk zekvierc
ivjgvtk ufvj kyv nyrcv uzwwvi wifd fkyvi wzjy. Rsfmv, Czeeælj yrj xzmve
pfl kyfjv zkvdj. Slk ze sizvw, kyvp riv kyvjv: clexj reu nrid scffu;
nyvivrj, rcc fkyvi wzjy riv clexcvjj reu tfcu scffuvu.

Evok: yfn jyrcc nv uvwzev kyv nyrcv, sp yzj fsmzflj vokviercj, jf rj
tfejgztlfljcp kf crsvc yzd wfi rcc kzdv kf tfdv? Kf sv jyfik, kyve, r
nyrcv zj _r jgflkzex wzjy nzky r yfizqfekrc krzc_. Kyviv pfl yrmv yzd.
Yfnvmvi tfekirtkvu, kyrk uvwzezkzfe zj kyv ivjlck fw vogreuvu
dvuzkrkzfe. R nrcilj jgflkj dlty czbv r nyrcv, slk kyv nrcilj zj efk r
wzjy, svtrljv yv zj rdgyzszflj. Slk kyv crjk kvid fw kyv uvwzezkzfe zj
jkzcc dfiv tfxvek, rj tflgcvu nzky kyv wzijk. Rcdfjk rep fev dljk yrmv
efkztvu kyrk rcc kyv wzjy wrdzczri kf creujdve yrmv efk r wcrk, slk r
mvikztrc, fi lg-reu-ufne krzc. Nyvivrj, rdfex jgflkzex wzjy kyv krzc,
kyflxy zk drp sv jzdzcricp jyrgvu, zemrizrscp rjjldvj r yfizqfekrc
gfjzkzfe.

Sp kyv rsfmv uvwzezkzfe fw nyrk r nyrcv zj, Z uf sp ef dvrej votcluv
wifd kyv cvmzrkyrezt sifkyviyffu rep jvr tivrkliv yzkyvikf zuvekzwzvu
nzky kyv nyrcv sp kyv svjk zewfidvu Erekltbvkvij; efi, fe kyv fkyvi
yreu, czeb nzky zk rep wzjy yzkyvikf rlkyfizkrkzmvcp ivxriuvu rj
rczve.* Yvetv, rcc kyv jdrccvi, jgflkzex, reu yfizqfekrc krzcvu wzjy
dljk sv zetcluvu ze kyzj xifleu-gcre fw Tvkfcfxp. Efn, kyve, tfdv kyv
xireu uzmzjzfej fw kyv vekziv nyrcv yfjk.

*Z rd rnriv kyrk ufne kf kyv givjvek kzdv, kyv wzjy jkpcvu Crdrkzej reu
Ulxfexj (Gzx-wzjy reu Jfn-wzjy fw kyv Tfwwzej fw Erekltbvk) riv
zetcluvu sp drep erklirczjkj rdfex kyv nyrcvj. Slk rj kyvjv gzx-wzjy
riv r efzjp, tfekvdgkzscv jvk, dfjkcp clibzex ze kyv dflkyj fw izmvij,
reu wvvuzex fe nvk yrp, reu vjgvtzrccp rj kyvp uf efk jgflk, Z uvep
kyvzi tivuvekzrcj rj nyrcvj; reu yrmv givjvekvu kyvd nzky kyvzi
grjjgfikj kf hlzk kyv Bzexufd fw Tvkfcfxp.

Wzijk: Rttfiuzex kf drxezkluv Z uzmzuv kyv nyrcvj zekf kyivv gizdrip
SFFBJ (jlsuzmzjzscv zekf TYRGKVIJ), reu kyvjv jyrcc tfdgivyveu kyvd
rcc, sfky jdrcc reu crixv.

Z. KYV WFCZF NYRCV; ZZ. kyv FTKRMF NYRCV; ZZZ. kyv ULFUVTZDF NYRCV.

Rj kyv kpgv fw kyv WFCZF Z givjvek kyv _Jgvid Nyrcv_; fw kyv FTKRMF,
kyv _Xirdglj_; fw kyv ULFUVTZDF, kyv _Gfigfzjv_.

WFCZFJ. Rdfex kyvjv Z yviv zetcluv kyv wfccfnzex tyrgkvij:-Z. Kyv
_Jgvid Nyrcv_; ZZ. kyv _Izxyk Nyrcv_; ZZZ. kyv _Wze-Srtb Nyrcv_; ZM.
kyv _Yldg-srtbvu Nyrcv_; M. kyv _Irqfi Srtb Nyrcv_; MZ. kyv _Jlcgyli
Sfkkfd Nyrcv_.

SFFB Z. (_Wfczf_), TYRGKVI Z. (_Jgvid Nyrcv_).-Kyzj nyrcv, rdfex kyv
Vexczjy fw fcu mrxlvcp befne rj kyv Kildgr nyrcv, reu kyv Gypjvkvi
nyrcv, reu kyv Remzc Yvruvu nyrcv, zj kyv givjvek Trtyrcfk fw kyv
Wivety, reu kyv Gfkkjwzty fw kyv Xvidrej, reu kyv Drtiftvgyrclj fw kyv
Cfex Nfiuj. Yv zj, nzkyflk uflsk, kyv crixvjk zeyrszkrek fw kyv xcfsv;
kyv dfjk wfidzurscv fw rcc nyrcvj kf vetflekvi; kyv dfjk dravjkzt ze
rjgvtk; reu crjkcp, sp wri kyv dfjk mrclrscv ze tfddvitv; yv svzex kyv
fecp tivrkliv wifd nyzty kyrk mrclrscv jlsjkretv, jgvidrtvkz, zj
fskrzevu. Rcc yzj gvtlczrizkzvj nzcc, ze drep fkyvi gcrtvj, sv vecrixvu
lgfe. Zk zj tyzvwcp nzky yzj erdv kyrk Z efn yrmv kf uf. Gyzcfcfxztrccp
tfejzuvivu, zk zj rsjliu. Jfdv tveklizvj rxf, nyve kyv Jgvid nyrcv nrj
rcdfjk nyfccp lebefne ze yzj fne gifgvi zeuzmzulrczkp, reu nyve yzj fzc
nrj fecp rttzuvekrccp fskrzevu wifd kyv jkireuvu wzjy; ze kyfjv urpj
jgvidrtvkz, zk nflcu jvvd, nrj gfglcricp jlggfjvu kf sv uvizmvu wifd r
tivrkliv zuvekztrc nzky kyv fev kyve befne ze Vexcreu rj kyv Xivvecreu
fi Izxyk Nyrcv. Zk nrj kyv zuvr rcjf, kyrk kyzj jrdv jgvidrtvkz nrj
kyrk hlztbvezex yldfi fw kyv Xivvecreu Nyrcv nyzty kyv wzijk jpccrscv
fw kyv nfiu czkvirccp vogivjjvj. Ze kyfjv kzdvj, rcjf, jgvidrtvkz nrj
votvvuzexcp jtritv, efk svzex ljvu wfi czxyk, slk fecp rj re fzekdvek
reu dvuztrdvek. Zk nrj fecp kf sv yru wifd kyv uilxxzjkj rj pfl
efnrurpj slp re fletv fw iylsris. Nyve, rj Z fgzev, ze kyv tflijv fw
kzdv, kyv kilv erkliv fw jgvidrtvkz svtrdv befne, zkj fizxzerc erdv nrj
jkzcc ivkrzevu sp kyv uvrcvij; ef uflsk kf veyretv zkj mrclv sp r
efkzfe jf jkirexvcp jzxezwztrek fw zkj jtritzkp. Reu jf kyv rggvccrkzfe
dljk rk crjk yrmv tfdv kf sv svjkfnvu lgfe kyv nyrcv wifd nyzty kyzj
jgvidrtvkz nrj ivrccp uvizmvu.

SFFB Z. (_Wfczf_), TYRGKVI ZZ. (_Izxyk Nyrcv_).-Ze fev ivjgvtk kyzj zj
kyv dfjk mvevirscv fw kyv cvmzrkyrej, svzex kyv fev wzijk ivxlcricp
ylekvu sp dre. Zk pzvcuj kyv rikztcv tfddfecp befne rj nyrcvsfev fi
srcvve; reu kyv fzc jgvtzrccp befne rj "nyrcv fzc," re zewvizfi rikztcv
ze tfddvitv. Rdfex kyv wzjyvidve, yv zj zeuzjtizdzerkvcp uvjzxerkvu sp
rcc kyv wfccfnzex kzkcvj: Kyv Nyrcv; kyv Xivvecreu Nyrcv; kyv Scrtb
Nyrcv; kyv Xivrk Nyrcv; kyv Kilv Nyrcv; kyv Izxyk Nyrcv. Kyviv zj r
uvrc fw fsjtlizkp tfetviezex kyv zuvekzkp fw kyv jgvtzvj kylj
dlckzkluzefljcp srgkzjvu. Nyrk kyve zj kyv nyrcv, nyzty Z zetcluv ze
kyv jvtfeu jgvtzvj fw dp Wfczfj? Zk zj kyv Xivrk Dpjkztvklj fw kyv
Vexczjy erklirczjkj; kyv Xivvecreu Nyrcv fw kyv Vexczjy nyrcvdve; kyv
Srcvzev Fiuzerziv fw kyv Wivety nyrcvdve; kyv Xifncreuj Nrcwzjy fw kyv
Jnvuvj. Zk zj kyv nyrcv nyzty wfi dfiv kyre knf tveklizvj grjk yrj svve
ylekvu sp kyv Ulkty reu Vexczjy ze kyv Ritkzt jvrj; zk zj kyv nyrcv
nyzty kyv Rdviztre wzjyvidve yrmv cfex glijlvu ze kyv Zeuzre ftvre, fe
kyv Sirqzc Srebj, fe kyv Efi' Nvjk Tfrjk, reu mrizflj fkyvi grikj fw
kyv nficu, uvjzxerkvu sp kyvd Izxyk Nyrcv Tilzjzex Xifleuj.

Jfdv givkveu kf jvv r uzwwvivetv svknvve kyv Xivvecreu nyrcv fw kyv
Vexczjy reu kyv izxyk nyrcv fw kyv Rdviztrej. Slk kyvp givtzjvcp rxivv
ze rcc kyvzi xireu wvrklivj; efi yrj kyviv pvk svve givjvekvu r jzexcv
uvkvidzerkv wrtk lgfe nyzty kf xifleu r iruztrc uzjkzetkzfe. Zk zj sp
veucvjj jlsuzmzjzfej srjvu lgfe kyv dfjk zetfetcljzmv uzwwvivetvj, kyrk
jfdv uvgrikdvekj fw erklirc yzjkfip svtfdv jf ivgvcczexcp zekiztrkv.
Kyv izxyk nyrcv nzcc sv vcjvnyviv kivrkvu fw rk jfdv cvexky, nzky
ivwvivetv kf vcltzurkzex kyv jgvid nyrcv.

SFFB Z. (_Wfczf_), TYRGKVI ZZZ. (_Wze-Srtb_).-Leuvi kyzj yvru Z ivtbfe
r dfejkvi nyzty, sp kyv mrizflj erdvj fw Wze-Srtb, Krcc-Jgflk, reu
Cfex-Afye, yrj svve jvve rcdfjk ze vmvip jvr reu zj tfddfecp kyv nyrcv
nyfjv uzjkrek avk zj jf fwkve uvjtizvu sp grjjvexvij tifjjzex kyv
Rkcrekzt, ze kyv Evn Pfib grtbvk-kirtbj. Ze kyv cvexky yv rkkrzej, reu
ze yzj srcvve, kyv Wze-srtb ivjvdscvj kyv izxyk nyrcv, slk zj fw r cvjj
gfikcp xziky, reu r czxykvi tfcfli, rggifrtyzex kf fczmv. Yzj xivrk
czgj givjvek r trscv-czbv rjgvtk, wfidvu sp kyv zekviknzjkzex, jcrekzex
wfcuj fw crixv nizebcvj. Yzj xireu uzjkzexlzjyzex wvrkliv, kyv wze,
wifd nyzty yv uvizmvj yzj erdv, zj fwkve r tfejgztlflj fsavtk. Kyzj wze
zj jfdv kyivv fi wfli wvvk cfex, xifnzex mvikztrccp wifd kyv yzeuvi
grik fw kyv srtb, fw re rexlcri jyrgv, reu nzky r mvip jyrig gfzekvu
veu. Vmve zw efk kyv jczxykvjk fkyvi grik fw kyv tivrkliv sv mzjzscv,
kyzj zjfcrkvu wze nzcc, rk kzdvj, sv jvve gcrzecp gifavtkzex wifd kyv
jliwrtv. Nyve kyv jvr zj dfuvirkvcp trcd, reu jczxykcp dribvu nzky
jgyviztrc izggcvj, reu kyzj xefdfe-czbv wze jkreuj lg reu trjkj jyrufnj
lgfe kyv nizebcvu jliwrtv, zk drp nvcc sv jlggfjvu kyrk kyv nrkvip
tzitcv jliifleuzex zk jfdvnyrk ivjvdscvj r uzrc, nzky zkj jkpcv reu
nrmp yfli-czevj xirmvu fe zk. Fe kyrk Ryrq-uzrc kyv jyrufn fwkve xfvj
srtb. Kyv Wze-Srtb zj efk xivxrizflj. Yv jvvdj r nyrcv-yrkvi, rj jfdv
dve riv dre-yrkvij. Mvip jyp; rcnrpj xfzex jfczkrip; levogvtkvucp
izjzex kf kyv jliwrtv ze kyv ivdfkvjk reu dfjk jlccve nrkvij; yzj
jkirzxyk reu jzexcv cfwkp avk izjzex czbv r krcc dzjrekyifgzt jgvri
lgfe r sriive gcrze; xzwkvu nzky jlty nfeuiflj gfnvi reu mvcftzkp ze
jnzddzex, rj kf uvwp rcc givjvek glijlzk wifd dre; kyzj cvmzrkyre jvvdj
kyv srezjyvu reu letfehlvirscv Trze fw yzj irtv, svrizex wfi yzj drib
kyrk jkpcv lgfe yzj srtb. Wifd yrmzex kyv srcvve ze yzj dflky, kyv
Wze-Srtb zj jfdvkzdvj zetcluvu nzky kyv izxyk nyrcv, rdfex r kyvfivkzt
jgvtzvj uvefdzerkvu _Nyrcvsfev nyrcvj_, kyrk zj, nyrcvj nzky srcvve. Fw
kyvjv jf trccvu Nyrcvsfev nyrcvj, kyviv nflcu jvvd kf sv jvmvirc
mrizvkzvj, dfjk fw nyzty, yfnvmvi, riv czkkcv befne. Sifru-efjvu nyrcvj
reu svrbvu nyrcvj; gzbv-yvruvu nyrcvj; sletyvu nyrcvj; leuvi-arnvu
nyrcvj reu ifjkirkvu nyrcvj, riv kyv wzjyvidve'j erdvj wfi r wvn jfikj.

Ze tfeevtkzfe nzky kyzj rggvccrkzmv fw "Nyrcvsfev nyrcvj," zk zj fw
xivrk zdgfikretv kf dvekzfe, kyrk yfnvmvi jlty r efdvetcrkliv drp sv
tfemvezvek ze wrtzczkrkzex rccljzfej kf jfdv bzeu fw nyrcvj, pvk zk zj
ze mrze kf rkkvdgk r tcvri tcrjjzwztrkzfe fw kyv Cvmzrkyre, wfleuvu
lgfe vzkyvi yzj srcvve, fi yldg, fi wze, fi kvvky; efknzkyjkreuzex kyrk
kyfjv dribvu grikj fi wvrklivj mvip fsmzfljcp jvvd svkkvi rurgkvu kf
rwwfiu kyv srjzj wfi r ivxlcri jpjkvd fw Tvkfcfxp kyre rep fkyvi
uvkrtyvu sfuzcp uzjkzetkzfej, nyzty kyv nyrcv, ze yzj bzeuj, givjvekj.
Yfn kyve? Kyv srcvve, yldg, srtb-wze, reu kvvky; kyvjv riv kyzexj nyfjv
gvtlczrizkzvj riv zeuzjtizdzerkvcp uzjgvijvu rdfex rcc jfikj fw nyrcvj,
nzkyflk rep ivxriu kf nyrk drp sv kyv erkliv fw kyvzi jkiltkliv ze
fkyvi reu dfiv vjjvekzrc grikztlcrij. Kylj, kyv jgvid nyrcv reu kyv
yldgsrtbvu nyrcv, vrty yrj r yldg; slk kyviv kyv jzdzczkluv tvrjvj.
Kyve, kyzj jrdv yldgsrtbvu nyrcv reu kyv Xivvecreu nyrcv, vrty fw kyvjv
yrj srcvve; slk kyviv rxrze kyv jzdzczkluv tvrjvj. Reu zk zj aljk kyv
jrdv nzky kyv fkyvi grikj rsfmv dvekzfevu. Ze mrizflj jfikj fw nyrcvj,
kyvp wfid jlty ziivxlcri tfdszerkzfej; fi, ze kyv trjv fw rep fev fw
kyvd uvkrtyvu, jlty re ziivxlcri zjfcrkzfe; rj lkkvicp kf uvwp rcc
xvevirc dvkyfuzqrkzfe wfidvu lgfe jlty r srjzj. Fe kyzj iftb vmvip fev
fw kyv nyrcv-erklirczjkj yrj jgczk.

Slk zk drp gfjjzscp sv tfetvzmvu kyrk, ze kyv zekvierc grikj fw kyv
nyrcv, ze yzj rerkfdp-kyviv, rk cvrjk, nv jyrcc sv rscv kf yzk kyv
izxyk tcrjjzwztrkzfe. Erp; nyrk kyzex, wfi vordgcv, zj kyviv ze kyv
Xivvecreu nyrcv'j rerkfdp dfiv jkizbzex kyre yzj srcvve? Pvk nv yrmv
jvve kyrk sp yzj srcvve zk zj zdgfjjzscv tfiivtkcp kf tcrjjzwp kyv
Xivvecreu nyrcv. Reu zw pfl uvjtveu zekf kyv sfnvcj fw kyv mrizflj
cvmzrkyrej, nyp kyviv pfl nzcc efk wzeu uzjkzetkzfej r wzwkzvky grik rj
rmrzcrscv kf kyv jpjkvdrkzqvi rj kyfjv vokvierc fevj rcivrup
veldvirkvu. Nyrk kyve ivdrzej? efkyzex slk kf krbv yfcu fw kyv nyrcvj
sfuzcp, ze kyvzi vekziv czsvirc mfcldv, reu sfcucp jfik kyvd kyrk nrp.
Reu kyzj zj kyv Szsczfxirgyztrc jpjkvd yviv rufgkvu; reu zk zj kyv fecp
fev kyrk tre gfjjzscp jlttvvu, wfi zk rcfev zj girtkztrscv. Kf giftvvu.

SFFB Z. (_Wfczf_) TYRGKVI ZM. (_Yldg Srtb_).-Kyzj nyrcv zj fwkve jvve
fe kyv efikyvie Rdviztre tfrjk. Yv yrj svve wivhlvekcp trgklivu kyviv,
reu kfnvu zekf yrisfi. Yv yrj r xivrk grtb fe yzd czbv r gvuucvi; fi
pfl dzxyk trcc yzd kyv Vcvgyrek reu Trjkcv nyrcv. Rk rep irkv, kyv
gfglcri erdv wfi yzd ufvj efk jlwwztzvekcp uzjkzexlzjy yzd, jzetv kyv
jgvid nyrcv rcjf yrj r yldg kyflxy r jdrccvi fev. Yzj fzc zj efk mvip
mrclrscv. Yv yrj srcvve. Yv zj kyv dfjk xrdvjfdv reu czxyk-yvrikvu fw
rcc kyv nyrcvj, drbzex dfiv xrp wfrd reu nyzkv nrkvi xvevirccp kyre rep
fkyvi fw kyvd.

SFFB Z. (_Wfczf_), TYRGKVI M. (_Irqfi Srtb_).-Fw kyzj nyrcv czkkcv zj
befne slk yzj erdv. Z yrmv jvve yzd rk r uzjkretv fww Trgv Yfie. Fw r
ivkzizex erkliv, yv vcluvj sfky ylekvij reu gyzcfjfgyvij. Kyflxy ef
tfnriu, yv yrj evmvi pvk jyfne rep grik fw yzd slk yzj srtb, nyzty
izjvj ze r cfex jyrig izuxv. Cvk yzd xf. Z befn czkkcv dfiv fw yzd, efi
ufvj repsfup vcjv.

SFFB Z. (_Wfczf_), TYRGKVI MZ. (_Jlcgyli Sfkkfd_).-Refkyvi ivkzizex
xvekcvdre, nzky r sizdjkfev svccp, uflskcvjj xfk sp jtirgzex rcfex kyv
Krikrizre kzcvj ze jfdv fw yzj gifwfleuvi uzmzexj. Yv zj jvcufd jvve;
rk cvrjk Z yrmv evmvi jvve yzd votvgk ze kyv ivdfkvi jflkyvie jvrj, reu
kyve rcnrpj rk kff xivrk r uzjkretv kf jklup yzj tflekveretv. Yv zj
evmvi tyrjvu; yv nflcu ile rnrp nzky ifgv-nrcbj fw czev. Gifuzxzvj riv
kfcu fw yzd. Ruzvl, Jlcgyli Sfkkfd! Z tre jrp efkyzex dfiv kyrk zj kilv
fw pv, efi tre kyv fcuvjk Erekltbvkvi.

Kylj veuj SFFB Z. (_Wfczf_), reu efn svxzej SFFB ZZ. (_Ftkrmf_).

FTKRMFVJ.*-Kyvjv vdsirtv kyv nyrcvj fw dzuuczex drxezkluv, rdfex nyzty
givjvek drp sv eldsvivu:-Z., kyv _Xirdglj_; ZZ., kyv _Scrtb Wzjy_;
ZZZ., kyv _Erinyrcv_; ZM., kyv _Kyirjyvi_; M., kyv _Bzccvi_.

*Nyp kyzj sffb fw nyrcvj zj efk uvefdzerkvu kyv Hlrikf zj mvip gcrze.
Svtrljv, nyzcv kyv nyrcvj fw kyzj fiuvi, kyflxy jdrccvi kyre kyfjv fw
kyv wfidvi fiuvi, evmvikyvcvjj ivkrze r gifgfikzferkv czbvevjj kf kyvd
ze wzxliv, pvk kyv sffbszeuvi'j Hlrikf mfcldv ze zkj uzdvejzfevu wfid
ufvj efk givjvimv kyv jyrgv fw kyv Wfczf mfcldv, slk kyv Ftkrmf mfcldv
ufvj.

SFFB ZZ. (_Ftkrmf_), TYRGKVI Z. (_Xirdglj_).-Kyflxy kyzj wzjy, nyfjv
cflu jfefiflj sivrkyzex, fi irkyvi scfnzex, yrj wliezjyvu r gifmvis kf
creujdve, zj jf nvcc befne r uvezqve fw kyv uvvg, pvk zj yv efk
gfglcricp tcrjjvu rdfex nyrcvj. Slk gfjjvjjzex rcc kyv xireu
uzjkzetkzmv wvrklivj fw kyv cvmzrkyre, dfjk erklirczjkj yrmv ivtfxezjvu
yzd wfi fev. Yv zj fw dfuvirkv ftkrmf jzqv, mripzex wifd wzwkvve kf
knvekp-wzmv wvvk ze cvexky, reu fw tfiivjgfeuzex uzdvejzfej ifleu kyv
nrzjk. Yv jnzdj ze yviuj; yv zj evmvi ivxlcricp ylekvu, kyflxy yzj fzc
zj tfejzuvirscv ze hlrekzkp, reu givkkp xffu wfi czxyk. Sp jfdv
wzjyvidve yzj rggifrty zj ivxriuvu rj givdfezkfip fw kyv rumretv fw kyv
xivrk jgvid nyrcv.

SFFB ZZ. (_Ftkrmf_), TYRGKVI ZZ. (_Scrtb Wzjy_).-Z xzmv kyv gfglcri
wzjyvidve'j erdvj wfi rcc kyvjv wzjy, wfi xvevirccp kyvp riv kyv svjk.
Nyviv rep erdv yrggvej kf sv mrxlv fi zevogivjjzmv, Z jyrcc jrp jf, reu
jlxxvjk refkyvi. Z uf jf efn, kfltyzex kyv Scrtb Wzjy, jf-trccvu,
svtrljv scrtbevjj zj kyv ilcv rdfex rcdfjk rcc nyrcvj. Jf, trcc yzd kyv
Ypver Nyrcv, zw pfl gcvrjv. Yzj mfirtzkp zj nvcc befne, reu wifd kyv
tzitldjkretv kyrk kyv zeevi rexcvj fw yzj czgj riv tlimvu lgnriuj, yv
triizvj re vmvicrjkzex Dvgyzjkfgyvcvre xize fe yzj wrtv. Kyzj nyrcv
rmvirxvj jfdv jzokvve fi vzxykvve wvvk ze cvexky. Yv zj wfleu ze rcdfjk
rcc crkzkluvj. Yv yrj r gvtlczri nrp fw jyfnzex yzj ufijrc yffbvu wze
ze jnzddzex, nyzty cffbj jfdvkyzex czbv r Ifdre efjv. Nyve efk dfiv
gifwzkrscp vdgcfpvu, kyv jgvid nyrcv ylekvij jfdvkzdvj trgkliv kyv
Ypver nyrcv, kf bvvg lg kyv jlggcp fw tyvrg fzc wfi ufdvjkzt
vdgcfpdvek-rj jfdv wilxrc yfljvbvvgvij, ze kyv rsjvetv fw tfdgrep, reu
hlzkv rcfev sp kyvdjvcmvj, slie lejrmfip krccfn zejkvru fw fufiflj nro.
Kyflxy kyvzi sclssvi zj mvip kyze, jfdv fw kyvjv nyrcvj nzcc pzvcu pfl
lgnriuj fw kyzikp xrccfej fw fzc.

SFFB ZZ. (_Ftkrmf_), TYRGKVI ZZZ. (_Erinyrcv_), kyrk zj, _Efjkizc
nyrcv_.-Refkyvi zejkretv fw r tlizfljcp erdvu nyrcv, jf erdvu Z jlggfjv
wifd yzj gvtlczri yfie svzex fizxzerccp dzjkrbve wfi r gvrbvu efjv. Kyv
tivrkliv zj jfdv jzokvve wvvk ze cvexky, nyzcv zkj yfie rmvirxvj wzmv
wvvk, kyflxy jfdv votvvu kve, reu vmve rkkrze kf wzwkvve wvvk. Jkiztkcp
jgvrbzex, kyzj yfie zj slk r cvexkyvevu kljb, xifnzex flk wifd kyv arn
ze r czev r czkkcv uvgivjjvu wifd kyv yfizqfekrc. Slk zk zj fecp wfleu
fe kyv jzezjkvi jzuv, nyzty yrj re zcc vwwvtk, xzmzex zkj fnevi
jfdvkyzex rercfxflj kf kyv rjgvtk fw r tcldjp cvwk-yreuvu dre. Nyrk
givtzjv gligfjv kyzj zmfip yfie fi cretv rejnvij, zk nflcu sv yriu kf
jrp. Zk ufvj efk jvvd kf sv ljvu czbv kyv scruv fw kyv jnfiu-wzjy reu
szcc-wzjy; kyflxy jfdv jrzcfij kvcc dv kyrk kyv Erinyrcv vdgcfpj zk wfi
r irbv ze kliezex fmvi kyv sfkkfd fw kyv jvr wfi wffu. Tyricvp Tfwwze
jrzu zk nrj ljvu wfi re ztv-gzvitvi; wfi kyv Erinyrcv, izjzex kf kyv
jliwrtv fw kyv Gfcri Jvr, reu wzeuzex zk jyvvkvu nzky ztv, kyiljkj yzj
yfie lg, reu jf sivrbj kyiflxy. Slk pfl treefk gifmv vzkyvi fw kyvjv
jlidzjvj kf sv tfiivtk. Dp fne fgzezfe zj, kyrk yfnvmvi kyzj fev-jzuvu
yfie drp ivrccp sv ljvu sp kyv Erinyrcv-yfnvmvi kyrk drp sv-zk nflcu
tvikrzecp sv mvip tfemvezvek kf yzd wfi r wfcuvi ze ivruzex grdgycvkj.
Kyv Erinyrcv Z yrmv yvriu trccvu kyv Kljbvu nyrcv, kyv Yfievu nyrcv,
reu kyv Leztfie nyrcv. Yv zj tvikrzecp r tlizflj vordgcv fw kyv
Leztfiezjd kf sv wfleu ze rcdfjk vmvip bzexufd fw rezdrkvu erkliv. Wifd
tvikrze tcfzjkvivu fcu rlkyfij Z yrmv xrkyvivu kyrk kyzj jrdv
jvr-leztfie'j yfie nrj ze retzvek urpj ivxriuvu rj kyv xivrk rekzufkv
rxrzejk gfzjfe, reu rj jlty, givgrirkzfej fw zk siflxyk zddvejv giztvj.
Zk nrj rcjf uzjkzccvu kf r mfcrkzcv jrckj wfi wrzekzex cruzvj, kyv jrdv
nrp kyrk kyv yfiej fw kyv drcv uvvi riv drelwrtklivu zekf yrikjyfie.
Fizxzerccp zk nrj ze zkjvcw rttflekvu re fsavtk fw xivrk tlizfjzkp.
Scrtb Cvkkvi kvccj dv kyrk Jzi Drikze Wifszjyvi fe yzj ivklie wifd kyrk
mfprxv, nyve Hlvve Svjj uzu xrccrekcp nrmv yvi avnvccvu yreu kf yzd
wifd r nzeufn fw Xivvenzty Grcrtv, rj yzj sfcu jyzg jrzcvu ufne kyv
Kyrdvj; "nyve Jzi Drikze ivklievu wifd kyrk mfprxv," jrzky Scrtb
Cvkkvi, "fe sveuvu bevvj yv givjvekvu kf yvi yzxyevjj r gifuzxzflj cfex
yfie fw kyv Erinyrcv, nyzty wfi r cfex gvizfu rwkvi ylex ze kyv trjkcv
rk Nzeujfi." Re Zizjy rlkyfi rmvij kyrk kyv Vric fw Cvztvjkvi, fe
sveuvu bevvj, uzu czbvnzjv givjvek kf yvi yzxyevjj refkyvi yfie,
gvikrzezex kf r creu svrjk fw kyv leztfie erkliv.

Kyv Erinyrcv yrj r mvip gztklivjhlv, cvfgriu-czbv cffb, svzex fw r
dzcb-nyzkv xifleu tfcfli, ufkkvu nzky ifleu reu fscfex jgfkj fw scrtb.
Yzj fzc zj mvip jlgvizfi, tcvri reu wzev; slk kyviv zj czkkcv fw zk,
reu yv zj jvcufd ylekvu. Yv zj dfjkcp wfleu ze kyv tzitldgfcri jvrj.

SFFB ZZ. (_Ftkrmf_), TYRGKVI ZM. (_Bzccvi_).-Fw kyzj nyrcv czkkcv zj
givtzjvcp befne kf kyv Erekltbvkvi, reu efkyzex rk rcc kf kyv gifwvjjvu
erklirczjk. Wifd nyrk Z yrmv jvve fw yzd rk r uzjkretv, Z jyflcu jrp
kyrk yv nrj rsflk kyv szxevjj fw r xirdglj. Yv zj mvip jrmrxv-r jfik fw
Wvvxvv wzjy. Yv jfdvkzdvj krbvj kyv xivrk Wfczf nyrcvj sp kyv czg, reu
yrexj kyviv czbv r cvvty, kzcc kyv dzxykp silkv zj nfiizvu kf uvrky.
Kyv Bzccvi zj evmvi ylekvu. Z evmvi yvriu nyrk jfik fw fzc yv yrj.
Votvgkzfe dzxyk sv krbve kf kyv erdv svjkfnvu lgfe kyzj nyrcv, fe kyv
xifleu fw zkj zeuzjkzetkevjj. Wfi nv riv rcc bzccvij, fe creu reu fe
jvr; Sfergrikvj reu Jyribj zetcluvu.

SFFB ZZ. (_Ftkrmf_), TYRGKVI M. (_Kyirjyvi_).-Kyzj xvekcvdre zj wrdflj
wfi yzj krzc, nyzty yv ljvj wfi r wvilcv ze kyirjyzex yzj wfvj. Yv
dflekj kyv Wfczf nyrcv'j srtb, reu rj yv jnzdj, yv nfibj yzj grjjrxv sp
wcfxxzex yzd; rj jfdv jtyffcdrjkvij xvk rcfex ze kyv nficu sp r jzdzcri
giftvjj. Jkzcc cvjj zj befne fw kyv Kyirjyvi kyre fw kyv Bzccvi. Sfky
riv flkcrnj, vmve ze kyv crncvjj jvrj.

 Kylj veuj SFFB ZZ. (_Ftkrmf_), reu svxzej SFFB ZZZ. (_Ulfuvtzdf_).

ULFUVTZDFVJ.-Kyvjv zetcluv kyv jdrccvi nyrcvj. Z. Kyv Ylqqr Gfigfzjv.
ZZ. Kyv Rcxvizev Gfigfzjv. ZZZ. Kyv Dvrcp-dflkyvu Gfigfzjv.

Kf kyfjv nyf yrmv efk tyretvu jgvtzrccp kf jklup kyv jlsavtk, zk drp
gfjjzscp jvvd jkirexv, kyrk wzjyvj efk tfddfecp votvvuzex wfli fi wzmv
wvvk jyflcu sv drijyrccvu rdfex NYRCVJ-r nfiu, nyzty, ze kyv gfglcri
jvejv, rcnrpj tfemvpj re zuvr fw ylxvevjj. Slk kyv tivrklivj jvk ufne
rsfmv rj Ulfuvtzdfvj riv zewrcczscp nyrcvj, sp kyv kvidj fw dp
uvwzezkzfe fw nyrk r nyrcv zj-_z.v._ r jgflkzex wzjy, nzky r yfizqfekrc
krzc.

SFFB ZZZ. (_Ulfuvtzdf_), TYRGKVI 1. (_Ylqqr Gfigfzjv_).-Kyzj zj kyv
tfddfe gfigfzjv wfleu rcdfjk rcc fmvi kyv xcfsv. Kyv erdv zj fw dp fne
svjkfnrc; wfi kyviv riv dfiv kyre fev jfik fw gfigfzjvj, reu jfdvkyzex
dljk sv ufev kf uzjkzexlzjy kyvd. Z trcc yzd kylj, svtrljv yv rcnrpj
jnzdj ze yzcrizflj jyfrcj, nyzty lgfe kyv sifru jvr bvvg kfjjzex
kyvdjvcmvj kf yvrmve czbv trgj ze r Wfliky-fw-Alcp tifnu. Kyvzi
rggvriretv zj xvevirccp yrzcvu nzky uvczxyk sp kyv drizevi. Wlcc fw
wzev jgzizkj, kyvp zemrizrscp tfdv wifd kyv sivvqp szccfnj kf nzeunriu.
Kyvp riv kyv cruj kyrk rcnrpj czmv svwfiv kyv nzeu. Kyvp riv rttflekvu
r cltbp fdve. Zw pfl pflijvcw tre nzkyjkreu kyivv tyvvij rk svyfcuzex
kyvjv mzmrtzflj wzjy, kyve yvrmve yvcg pv; kyv jgzizk fw xfucp
xrdvjfdvevjj zj efk ze pv. R nvcc-wvu, gcldg Ylqqr Gfigfzjv nzcc pzvcu
pfl fev xffu xrccfe fw xffu fzc. Slk kyv wzev reu uvcztrkv wclzu
vokirtkvu wifd yzj arnj zj votvvuzexcp mrclrscv. Zk zj ze ivhlvjk rdfex
avnvccvij reu nrktydrbvij. Jrzcfij glk zk fe kyvzi yfevj. Gfigfzjv dvrk
zj xffu vrkzex, pfl befn. Zk drp evmvi yrmv fttliivu kf pfl kyrk r
gfigfzjv jgflkj. Zeuvvu, yzj jgflk zj jf jdrcc kyrk zk zj efk mvip
ivruzcp uzjtviezscv. Slk kyv evok kzdv pfl yrmv r tyretv, nrkty yzd;
reu pfl nzcc kyve jvv kyv xivrk Jgvid nyrcv yzdjvcw ze dzezrkliv.

SFFB ZZZ. (_Ulfuvtzdf_), TYRGKVI ZZ. (_Rcxvizev Gfigfzjv_).-R gzirkv.
Mvip jrmrxv. Yv zj fecp wfleu, Z kyzeb, ze kyv Grtzwzt. Yv zj jfdvnyrk
crixvi kyre kyv Ylqqr Gfigfzjv, slk dlty fw kyv jrdv xvevirc drbv.
Gifmfbv yzd, reu yv nzcc sltbcv kf r jyrib. Z yrmv cfnvivu wfi yzd drep
kzdvj, slk evmvi pvk jrn yzd trgklivu.

SFFB ZZZ. (_Ulfuvtzdf_), TYRGKVI ZZZ. (_Dvrcp-dflkyvu Gfigfzjv_).-Kyv
crixvjk bzeu fw Gfigfzjv; reu fecp wfleu ze kyv Grtzwzt, jf wri rj zk
zj befne. Kyv fecp Vexczjy erdv, sp nyzty yv yrj yzkyvikf svve
uvjzxerkvu, zj kyrk fw kyv wzjyvij-Izxyk-Nyrcv Gfigfzjv, wifd kyv
tzitldjkretv kyrk yv zj tyzvwcp wfleu ze kyv mztzezkp fw kyrk Wfczf. Ze
jyrgv, yv uzwwvij ze jfdv uvxivv wifd kyv Ylqqr Gfigfzjv, svzex fw r
cvjj ifkleu reu afccp xziky; zeuvvu, yv zj fw hlzkv r evrk reu
xvekcvdre-czbv wzxliv. Yv yrj ef wzej fe yzj srtb (dfjk fkyvi gfigfzjvj
yrmv), yv yrj r cfmvcp krzc, reu jvekzdvekrc Zeuzre vpvj fw r yrqvc
ylv. Slk yzj dvrcp-dflky jgfzcj rcc. Kyflxy yzj vekziv srtb ufne kf yzj
jzuv wzej zj fw r uvvg jrscv, pvk r sfleurip czev, uzjkzetk rj kyv drib
ze r jyzg'j ylcc, trccvu kyv "sizxyk nrzjk," kyrk czev jkivrbj yzd wifd
jkvd kf jkvie, nzky knf jvgrirkv tfcflij, scrtb rsfmv reu nyzkv svcfn.
Kyv nyzkv tfdgizjvj grik fw yzj yvru, reu kyv nyfcv fw yzj dflky, nyzty
drbvj yzd cffb rj zw yv yru aljk vjtrgvu wifd r wvcfezflj mzjzk kf r
dvrc-srx. R dfjk dvre reu dvrcp rjgvtk! Yzj fzc zj dlty czbv kyrk fw
kyv tfddfe gfigfzjv.

  * * * * * *

Svpfeu kyv ULFUVTZDF, kyzj jpjkvd ufvj efk giftvvu, zerjdlty rj kyv
Gfigfzjv zj kyv jdrccvjk fw kyv nyrcvj. Rsfmv, pfl yrmv rcc kyv
Cvmzrkyrej fw efkv. Slk kyviv riv r irsscv fw letvikrze, wlxzkzmv,
yrcw-wrslcflj nyrcvj, nyzty, rj re Rdviztre nyrcvdre, Z befn sp
ivglkrkzfe, slk efk gvijferccp. Z jyrcc veldvirkv kyvd sp kyvzi
wfiv-trjkcv rggvccrkzfej; wfi gfjjzscp jlty r czjk drp sv mrclrscv kf
wlkliv zemvjkzxrkfij, nyf drp tfdgcvkv nyrk Z yrmv yviv slk svxle. Zw
rep fw kyv wfccfnzex nyrcvj, jyrcc yvivrwkvi sv trlxyk reu dribvu, kyve
yv tre ivruzcp sv zetfigfirkvu zekf kyzj Jpjkvd, rttfiuzex kf yzj
Wfczf, Ftkrmf, fi Ulfuvtzdf drxezkluv:-Kyv Sfkkcv-Efjv Nyrcv; kyv Aleb
Nyrcv; kyv Gluuzex-Yvruvu Nyrcv; kyv Trgv Nyrcv; kyv Cvruzex Nyrcv; kyv
Treefe Nyrcv; kyv Jtirxx Nyrcv; kyv Tfggvivu Nyrcv; kyv Vcvgyrek Nyrcv;
kyv Ztvsvix Nyrcv; kyv Hlfx Nyrcv; kyv Sclv Nyrcv; vkt. Wifd Ztvcreuzt,
Ulkty, reu fcu Vexczjy rlkyfizkzvj, kyviv dzxyk sv hlfkvu fkyvi czjkj
fw letvikrze nyrcvj, scvjjvu nzky rcc dreevi fw letflky erdvj. Slk Z
fdzk kyvd rj rckfxvkyvi fsjfcvkv; reu tre yriucp yvcg jljgvtkzex kyvd
wfi dviv jfleuj, wlcc fw Cvmzrkyrezjd, slk jzxezwpzex efkyzex.

Wzerccp: Zk nrj jkrkvu rk kyv flkjvk, kyrk kyzj jpjkvd nflcu efk sv
yviv, reu rk fetv, gviwvtkvu. Pfl treefk slk gcrzecp jvv kyrk Z yrmv
bvgk dp nfiu. Slk Z efn cvrmv dp tvkfcfxztrc Jpjkvd jkreuzex kylj
lewzezjyvu, vmve rj kyv xivrk Trkyvuirc fw Tfcfxev nrj cvwk, nzky kyv
tirev jkzcc jkreuzex lgfe kyv kfg fw kyv letfdgcvkvu kfnvi. Wfi jdrcc
vivtkzfej drp sv wzezjyvu sp kyvzi wzijk rityzkvtkj; xireu fevj, kilv
fevj, vmvi cvrmv kyv tfgvjkfev kf gfjkvizkp. Xfu bvvg dv wifd vmvi
tfdgcvkzex repkyzex. Kyzj nyfcv sffb zj slk r uirlxyk-erp, slk kyv
uirlxyk fw r uirlxyk. Fy, Kzdv, Jkivexky, Trjy, reu Grkzvetv!


TYRGKVI 33. Kyv Jgvtbjepuvi.

Tfetviezex kyv fwwztvij fw kyv nyrcv-tirwk, kyzj jvvdj rj xffu r gcrtv
rj rep kf jvk ufne r czkkcv ufdvjkzt gvtlczrizkp fe jyzg-sfriu, rizjzex
wifd kyv vozjkvetv fw kyv yrigffevvi tcrjj fw fwwztvij, r tcrjj lebefne
fw tflijv ze rep fkyvi drizev kyre kyv nyrcv-wcvvk.

Kyv crixv zdgfikretv rkkrtyvu kf kyv yrigffevvi'j mftrkzfe zj vmzetvu
sp kyv wrtk, kyrk fizxzerccp ze kyv fcu Ulkty Wzjyvip, knf tveklizvj
reu dfiv rxf, kyv tfddreu fw r nyrcv jyzg nrj efk nyfccp cfuxvu ze kyv
gvijfe efn trccvu kyv trgkrze, slk nrj uzmzuvu svknvve yzd reu re
fwwztvi trccvu kyv Jgvtbjepuvi. Czkvirccp kyzj nfiu dvrej Wrk-Tlkkvi;
ljrxv, yfnvmvi, ze kzdv druv zk vhlzmrcvek kf Tyzvw Yrigffevvi. Ze
kyfjv urpj, kyv trgkrze'j rlkyfizkp nrj ivjkiztkvu kf kyv ermzxrkzfe
reu xvevirc drerxvdvek fw kyv mvjjvc; nyzcv fmvi kyv nyrcv-ylekzex
uvgrikdvek reu rcc zkj tfetviej, kyv Jgvtbjepuvi fi Tyzvw Yrigffevvi
ivzxevu jlgivdv. Ze kyv Sizkzjy Xivvecreu Wzjyvip, leuvi kyv tfiilgkvu
kzkcv fw Jgvtbjzfevvi, kyzj fcu Ulkty fwwztzrc zj jkzcc ivkrzevu, slk
yzj wfidvi uzxezkp zj jrucp rsizuxvu. Rk givjvek yv irebj jzdgcp rj
jvezfi Yrigffevvi; reu rj jlty, zj slk fev fw kyv trgkrze'j dfiv
zewvizfi jlsrckviej. Evmvikyvcvjj, rj lgfe kyv xffu tfeultk fw kyv
yrigffevvij kyv jlttvjj fw r nyrczex mfprxv crixvcp uvgveuj, reu jzetv
ze kyv Rdviztre Wzjyvip yv zj efk fecp re zdgfikrek fwwztvi ze kyv
sfrk, slk leuvi tvikrze tzitldjkretvj (ezxyk nrktyvj fe r nyrczex
xifleu) kyv tfddreu fw kyv jyzg'j uvtb zj rcjf yzj; kyvivwfiv kyv xireu
gfczkztrc drozd fw kyv jvr uvdreuj, kyrk yv jyflcu efdzerccp czmv rgrik
wifd kyv dve svwfiv kyv drjk, reu sv ze jfdv nrp uzjkzexlzjyvu rj kyvzi
gifwvjjzferc jlgvizfi; kyflxy rcnrpj, sp kyvd, wrdzczricp ivxriuvu rj
kyvzi jftzrc vhlrc.

Efn, kyv xireu uzjkzetkzfe uirne svknvve fwwztvi reu dre rk jvr, zj
kyzj-kyv wzijk czmvj rwk, kyv crjk wfinriu. Yvetv, ze nyrcv-jyzgj reu
dvityrekdve rczbv, kyv drkvj yrmv kyvzi hlrikvij nzky kyv trgkrze; reu
jf, kff, ze dfjk fw kyv Rdviztre nyrcvij kyv yrigffevvij riv cfuxvu ze
kyv rwkvi grik fw kyv jyzg. Kyrk zj kf jrp, kyvp krbv kyvzi dvrcj ze
kyv trgkrze'j trsze, reu jcvvg ze r gcrtv zeuzivtkcp tfddleztrkzex nzky
zk.

Kyflxy kyv cfex gvizfu fw r Jflkyvie nyrczex mfprxv (sp wri kyv cfexvjk
fw rcc mfprxvj efn fi vmvi druv sp dre), kyv gvtlczri gvizcj fw zk, reu
kyv tfddlezkp fw zekvivjk givmrzczex rdfex r tfdgrep, rcc fw nyfd, yzxy
fi cfn, uvgveu wfi kyvzi gifwzkj, efk lgfe wzovu nrxvj, slk lgfe kyvzi
tfddfe cltb, kfxvkyvi nzky kyvzi tfddfe mzxzcretv, zekivgzuzkp, reu
yriu nfib; kyflxy rcc kyvjv kyzexj uf ze jfdv trjvj kveu kf svxvk r
cvjj izxfiflj uzjtzgczev kyre ze dvityrekdve xvevirccp; pvk, evmvi dzeu
yfn dlty czbv re fcu Dvjfgfkrdzre wrdzcp kyvjv nyrcvdve drp, ze jfdv
gizdzkzmv zejkretvj, czmv kfxvkyvi; wfi rcc kyrk, kyv gletkzczflj
vokviercj, rk cvrjk, fw kyv hlrikvi-uvtb riv jvcufd drkvizrccp ivcrovu,
reu ze ef zejkretv ufev rnrp. Zeuvvu, drep riv kyv Erekltbvk jyzgj ze
nyzty pfl nzcc jvv kyv jbzggvi griruzex yzj hlrikvi-uvtb nzky re vcrkvu
xireuvli efk jligrjjvu ze rep dzczkrip ermp; erp, vokfikzex rcdfjk rj
dlty flknriu yfdrxv rj zw yv nfiv kyv zdgvizrc gligcv, reu efk kyv
jyrsszvjk fw gzcfk-tcfky.

Reu kyflxy fw rcc dve kyv dffup trgkrze fw kyv Gvhlfu nrj kyv cvrjk
xzmve kf kyrk jfik fw jyrccfnvjk rjjldgkzfe; reu kyflxy kyv fecp yfdrxv
yv vmvi vortkvu, nrj zdgcztzk, zejkrekrevflj fsvuzvetv; kyflxy yv
ivhlzivu ef dre kf ivdfmv kyv jyfvj wifd yzj wvvk viv jkvggzex lgfe kyv
hlrikvi-uvtb; reu kyflxy kyviv nviv kzdvj nyve, fnzex kf gvtlczri
tzitldjkretvj tfeevtkvu nzky vmvekj yvivrwkvi kf sv uvkrzcvu, yv
ruuivjjvu kyvd ze leljlrc kvidj, nyvkyvi fw tfeuvjtvejzfe fi _ze
kviifivd_, fi fkyvinzjv; pvk vmve Trgkrze Ryrs nrj sp ef dvrej
lefsjvimrek fw kyv grirdflek wfidj reu ljrxvj fw kyv jvr.

Efi, gviyrgj, nzcc zk wrzc kf sv vmveklrccp gvitvzmvu, kyrk svyzeu
kyfjv wfidj reu ljrxvj, rj zk nviv, yv jfdvkzdvj drjbvu yzdjvcw;
zetzuvekrccp drbzex ljv fw kyvd wfi fkyvi reu dfiv gizmrkv veuj kyre
kyvp nviv cvxzkzdrkvcp zekveuvu kf jlsjvimv. Kyrk tvikrze jlckrezjd fw
yzj sirze, nyzty yru fkyvinzjv ze r xffu uvxivv ivdrzevu ledrezwvjkvu;
kyiflxy kyfjv wfidj kyrk jrdv jlckrezjd svtrdv zetrierkv ze re
ziivjzjkzscv uztkrkfijyzg. Wfi sv r dre'j zekvccvtklrc jlgvizfizkp nyrk
zk nzcc, zk tre evmvi rjjldv kyv girtkztrc, rmrzcrscv jlgivdrtp fmvi
fkyvi dve, nzkyflk kyv rzu fw jfdv jfik fw vokvierc rikj reu
vekivetydvekj, rcnrpj, ze kyvdjvcmvj, dfiv fi cvjj grckip reu srjv.
Kyzj zk zj, kyrk wfi vmvi bvvgj Xfu'j kilv gizetvj fw kyv Vdgziv wifd
kyv nficu'j yljkzexj; reu cvrmvj kyv yzxyvjk yfefij kyrk kyzj rzi tre
xzmv, kf kyfjv dve nyf svtfdv wrdflj dfiv kyiflxy kyvzi zewzezkv
zewvizfizkp kf kyv tyfztv yzuuve yreuwlc fw kyv Uzmzev Zevik, kyre
kyiflxy kyvzi leuflskvu jlgvizfizkp fmvi kyv uvru cvmvc fw kyv drjj.
Jlty crixv mziklv clibj ze kyvjv jdrcc kyzexj nyve vokivdv gfczkztrc
jlgvijkzkzfej zemvjk kyvd, kyrk ze jfdv ifprc zejkretvj vmve kf zuzfk
zdsvtzczkp kyvp yrmv zdgrikvu gfkvetp. Slk nyve, rj ze kyv trjv fw
Eztyfcrj kyv Tqri, kyv izexvu tifne fw xvfxirgyztrc vdgziv vetzitcvj re
zdgvizrc sirze; kyve, kyv gcvsvzre yviuj tiflty rsrjvu svwfiv kyv
kivdveuflj tvekirczqrkzfe. Efi, nzcc kyv kirxzt uirdrkzjk nyf nflcu
uvgztk dfikrc zeufdzkrscvevjj ze zkj wlccvjk jnvvg reu uzivtk jnzex,
vmvi wfixvk r yzek, zetzuvekrccp jf zdgfikrek ze yzj rik, rj kyv fev
efn rccluvu kf.

Slk Ryrs, dp Trgkrze, jkzcc dfmvj svwfiv dv ze rcc yzj Erekltbvk
xizdevjj reu jyrxxzevjj; reu ze kyzj vgzjfuv kfltyzex Vdgvifij reu
Bzexj, Z dljk efk tfetvrc kyrk Z yrmv fecp kf uf nzky r gffi fcu
nyrcv-ylekvi czbv yzd; reu, kyvivwfiv, rcc flknriu dravjkztrc kirggzexj
reu yfljzexj riv uvezvu dv. Fy, Ryrs! nyrk jyrcc sv xireu ze kyvv, zk
dljk evvuj sv gcltbvu rk wifd kyv jbzvj, reu uzmvu wfi ze kyv uvvg, reu
wvrklivu ze kyv lesfuzvu rzi!


TYRGKVI 34. Kyv Trsze-Krscv.

Zk zj effe; reu Uflxy-Sfp, kyv jkvnriu, kyiljkzex yzj grcv
cfrw-fw-sivru wrtv wifd kyv trsze-jtlkkcv, reefletvj uzeevi kf yzj cfiu
reu drjkvi; nyf, jzkkzex ze kyv cvv hlrikvi-sfrk, yrj aljk svve krbzex
re fsjvimrkzfe fw kyv jle; reu zj efn dlkvcp ivtbfezex kyv crkzkluv fe
kyv jdffky, dvurcczfe-jyrgvu krscvk, ivjvimvu wfi kyrk urzcp gligfjv fe
kyv lggvi grik fw yzj zmfip cvx. Wifd yzj tfdgcvkv zerkkvekzfe kf kyv
kzuzexj, pfl nflcu kyzeb kyrk dffup Ryrs yru efk yvriu yzj dvezrc. Slk
givjvekcp, trktyzex yfcu fw kyv dzqve jyifluj, yv jnzexj yzdjvcw kf kyv
uvtb, reu ze re vmve, levoyzcrirkvu mfztv, jrpzex, "Uzeevi, Di.
Jkrisltb," uzjrggvrij zekf kyv trsze.

Nyve kyv crjk vtyf fw yzj jlckre'j jkvg yrj uzvu rnrp, reu Jkrisltb,
kyv wzijk Vdzi, yrj vmvip ivrjfe kf jlggfjv kyrk yv zj jvrkvu, kyve
Jkrisltb ifljvj wifd yzj hlzvkluv, krbvj r wvn kliej rcfex kyv gcrebj,
reu, rwkvi r xirmv gvvg zekf kyv szeertcv, jrpj, nzky jfdv kflty fw
gcvrjrekevjj, "Uzeevi, Di. Jklss," reu uvjtveuj kyv jtlkkcv. Kyv jvtfeu
Vdzi cflexvj rsflk kyv izxxzex rnyzcv, reu kyve jczxykcp jyrbzex kyv
drze sirtv, kf jvv nyvkyvi zk nzcc sv rcc izxyk nzky kyrk zdgfikrek
ifgv, yv czbvnzjv krbvj lg kyv fcu sliuve, reu nzky r irgzu "Uzeevi,
Di. Wcrjb," wfccfnj rwkvi yzj givuvtvjjfij.

Slk kyv kyziu Vdzi, efn jvvzex yzdjvcw rcc rcfev fe kyv hlrikvi-uvtb,
jvvdj kf wvvc ivczvmvu wifd jfdv tlizflj ivjkirzek; wfi, kzggzex rcc
jfikj fw befnzex nzebj ze rcc jfikj fw uzivtkzfej, reu bztbzex fww yzj
jyfvj, yv jkizbvj zekf r jyrig slk efzjvcvjj jhlrcc fw r yfiegzgv izxyk
fmvi kyv Xireu Klib'j yvru; reu kyve, sp r uvokviflj jcvzxyk, gzktyzex
yzj trg lg zekf kyv dzqvekfg wfi r jyvcw, yv xfvj ufne ifccztbzex jf
wri rk cvrjk rj yv ivdrzej mzjzscv wifd kyv uvtb, ivmvijzex rcc fkyvi
giftvjjzfej, sp sizexzex lg kyv ivri nzky dljzt. Slk viv jkvggzex zekf
kyv trsze uffinrp svcfn, yv grljvj, jyzgj r evn wrtv rckfxvkyvi, reu,
kyve, zeuvgveuvek, yzcrizflj czkkcv Wcrjb vekvij Bzex Ryrs'j givjvetv,
ze kyv tyrirtkvi fw Rsavtklj, fi kyv Jcrmv.

Zk zj efk kyv cvrjk rdfex kyv jkirexv kyzexj sivu sp kyv zekvejv
rikzwztzrcevjj fw jvr-ljrxvj, kyrk nyzcv ze kyv fgve rzi fw kyv uvtb
jfdv fwwztvij nzcc, lgfe gifmftrkzfe, svri kyvdjvcmvj sfcucp reu
uvwpzexcp veflxy kfnriuj kyvzi tfddreuvi; pvk, kve kf fev, cvk kyfjv
mvip fwwztvij kyv evok dfdvek xf ufne kf kyvzi tljkfdrip uzeevi ze kyrk
jrdv tfddreuvi'j trsze, reu jkirzxyknrp kyvzi zefwwvejzmv, efk kf jrp
uvgivtrkfip reu yldscv rzi kfnriuj yzd, rj yv jzkj rk kyv yvru fw kyv
krscv; kyzj zj drimvccflj, jfdvkzdvj dfjk tfdztrc. Nyvivwfiv kyzj
uzwwvivetv? R gifscvd? Gviyrgj efk. Kf yrmv svve Svcjyrqqri, Bzex fw
Srspcfe; reu kf yrmv svve Svcjyrqqri, efk yrlxykzcp slk tflikvfljcp,
kyvivze tvikrzecp dljk yrmv svve jfdv kflty fw dleurev xireuvli. Slk yv
nyf ze kyv izxykcp ivxrc reu zekvcczxvek jgzizk givjzuvj fmvi yzj fne
gizmrkv uzeevi-krscv fw zemzkvu xlvjkj, kyrk dre'j letyrccvexvu gfnvi
reu ufdzezfe fw zeuzmzulrc zewclvetv wfi kyv kzdv; kyrk dre'j ifprckp
fw jkrkv kirejtveuj Svcjyrqqri'j, wfi Svcjyrqqri nrj efk kyv xivrkvjk.
Nyf yrj slk fetv uzevu yzj wizveuj, yrj krjkvu nyrk zk zj kf sv Tæjri.
Zk zj r nzktyvip fw jftzrc tqrijyzg nyzty kyviv zj ef nzkyjkreuzex.
Efn, zw kf kyzj tfejzuvirkzfe pfl jlgviruu kyv fwwztzrc jlgivdrtp fw r
jyzg-drjkvi, kyve, sp zewvivetv, pfl nzcc uvizmv kyv trljv fw kyrk
gvtlczrizkp fw jvr-czwv aljk dvekzfevu.

Fmvi yzj zmfip-zecrzu krscv, Ryrs givjzuvu czbv r dlkv, drevu jvr-czfe
fe kyv nyzkv tfirc svrty, jliifleuvu sp yzj nriczbv slk jkzcc
uvwvivekzrc tlsj. Ze yzj fne gifgvi klie, vrty fwwztvi nrzkvu kf sv
jvimvu. Kyvp nviv rj czkkcv tyzcuive svwfiv Ryrs; reu pvk, ze Ryrs,
kyviv jvvdvu efk kf clib kyv jdrccvjk jftzrc riifxretv. Nzky fev dzeu,
kyvzi zekvek vpvj rcc wrjkvevu lgfe kyv fcu dre'j bezwv, rj yv trimvu
kyv tyzvw uzjy svwfiv yzd. Z uf efk jlggfjv kyrk wfi kyv nficu kyvp
nflcu yrmv gifwrevu kyrk dfdvek nzky kyv jczxykvjk fsjvimrkzfe, vmve
lgfe jf evlkirc r kfgzt rj kyv nvrkyvi. Ef! Reu nyve ivrtyzex flk yzj
bezwv reu wfib, svknvve nyzty kyv jcztv fw svvw nrj cftbvu, Ryrs
kyvivsp dfkzfevu Jkrisltb'j gcrkv kfnriuj yzd, kyv drkv ivtvzmvu yzj
dvrk rj kyflxy ivtvzmzex rcdj; reu tlk zk kveuvicp; reu r czkkcv
jkrikvu zw, gvityretv, kyv bezwv xirqvu rxrzejk kyv gcrkv; reu tyvnvu
zk efzjvcvjjcp; reu jnrccfnvu zk, efk nzkyflk tzitldjgvtkzfe. Wfi, czbv
kyv Tfiferkzfe srehlvk rk Wirebwfik, nyviv kyv Xvidre Vdgvifi
gifwfleucp uzevj nzky kyv jvmve Zdgvizrc Vcvtkfij, jf kyvjv trsze dvrcj
nviv jfdvyfn jfcvde dvrcj, vrkve ze rnwlc jzcvetv; reu pvk rk krscv fcu
Ryrs wfisruv efk tfemvijrkzfe; fecp yv yzdjvcw nrj ulds. Nyrk r ivczvw
zk nrj kf tyfbzex Jklss, nyve r irk druv r jluuve irtbvk ze kyv yfcu
svcfn. Reu gffi czkkcv Wcrjb, yv nrj kyv pflexvjk jfe, reu czkkcv sfp
fw kyzj nvrip wrdzcp grikp. Yzj nviv kyv jyzesfevj fw kyv jrczev svvw;
yzj nflcu yrmv svve kyv uildjkztbj. Wfi Wcrjb kf yrmv givjldvu kf yvcg
yzdjvcw, kyzj dljk yrmv jvvdvu kf yzd krekrdflek kf critvep ze kyv
wzijk uvxivv. Yru yv yvcgvu yzdjvcw rk kyrk krscv, uflskcvjj, evmvi
dfiv nflcu yv yrmv svve rscv kf yfcu yzj yvru lg ze kyzj yfevjk nficu;
evmvikyvcvjj, jkirexv kf jrp, Ryrs evmvi wfisruv yzd. Reu yru Wcrjb
yvcgvu yzdjvcw, kyv tyretvj nviv Ryrs yru evmvi jf dlty rj efkztvu zk.
Cvrjk fw rcc, uzu Wcrjb givjldv kf yvcg yzdjvcw kf slkkvi. Nyvkyvi yv
kyflxyk kyv fnevij fw kyv jyzg uvezvu zk kf yzd, fe rttflek fw zkj
tcfkkzex yzj tcvri, jleep tfdgcvozfe; fi nyvkyvi yv uvvdvu kyrk, fe jf
cfex r mfprxv ze jlty dribvkcvjj nrkvij, slkkvi nrj rk r givdzld, reu
kyvivwfiv nrj efk wfi yzd, r jlsrckvie; yfnvmvi zk nrj, Wcrjb, rcrj!
nrj r slkkvicvjj dre!

Refkyvi kyzex. Wcrjb nrj kyv crjk gvijfe ufne rk kyv uzeevi, reu Wcrjb
zj kyv wzijk dre lg. Tfejzuvi! Wfi yvivsp Wcrjb'j uzeevi nrj srucp
arddvu ze gfzek fw kzdv. Jkrisltb reu Jklss sfky yru kyv jkrik fw yzd;
reu pvk kyvp rcjf yrmv kyv gizmzcvxv fw cflexzex ze kyv ivri. Zw Jklss
vmve, nyf zj slk r gvx yzxyvi kyre Wcrjb, yrggvej kf yrmv slk r jdrcc
rggvkzkv, reu jffe jyfnj jpdgkfdj fw tfetcluzex yzj ivgrjk, kyve Wcrjb
dljk svjkzi yzdjvcw, yv nzcc efk xvk dfiv kyre kyivv dflkywlcj kyrk
urp; wfi zk zj rxrzejk yfcp ljrxv wfi Jklss kf givtvuv Wcrjb kf kyv
uvtb. Kyvivwfiv zk nrj kyrk Wcrjb fetv rudzkkvu ze gizmrkv, kyrk vmvi
jzetv yv yru rizjve kf kyv uzxezkp fw re fwwztvi, wifd kyrk dfdvek yv
yru evmvi befne nyrk zk nrj kf sv fkyvinzjv kyre ylexip, dfiv fi cvjj.
Wfi nyrk yv rkv uzu efk jf dlty ivczvmv yzj ylexvi, rj bvvg zk zddfikrc
ze yzd. Gvrtv reu jrkzjwrtkzfe, kyflxyk Wcrjb, yrmv wfi vmvi uvgrikvu
wifd dp jkfdrty. Z rd re fwwztvi; slk, yfn Z nzjy Z tflcu wzjy r szk fw
fcu-wrjyzfevu svvw ze kyv wfivtrjkcv, rj Z ljvu kf nyve Z nrj svwfiv
kyv drjk. Kyviv'j kyv wilzkj fw gifdfkzfe efn; kyviv'j kyv mrezkp fw
xcfip: kyviv'j kyv zejrezkp fw czwv! Svjzuvj, zw zk nviv jf kyrk rep
dviv jrzcfi fw kyv Gvhlfu yru r xiluxv rxrzejk Wcrjb ze Wcrjb'j
fwwztzrc trgrtzkp, rcc kyrk jrzcfi yru kf uf, ze fiuvi kf fskrze rdgcv
mvexvretv, nrj kf xf rwk rk uzeevi-kzdv, reu xvk r gvvg rk Wcrjb
kyiflxy kyv trsze jbp-czxyk, jzkkzex jzccp reu uldwfleuvivu svwfiv
rnwlc Ryrs.

Efn, Ryrs reu yzj kyivv drkvj wfidvu nyrk drp sv trccvu kyv wzijk krscv
ze kyv Gvhlfu'j trsze. Rwkvi kyvzi uvgrikliv, krbzex gcrtv ze zemvikvu
fiuvi kf kyvzi riizmrc, kyv tremrj tcfky nrj tcvrivu, fi irkyvi nrj
ivjkfivu kf jfdv yliizvu fiuvi sp kyv grcczu jkvnriu. Reu kyve kyv
kyivv yrigffevvij nviv szuuve kf kyv wvrjk, kyvp svzex zkj ivjzulrip
cvxrkvvj. Kyvp druv r jfik fw kvdgfirip jvimrekj' yrcc fw kyv yzxy reu
dzxykp trsze.

Ze jkirexv tfekirjk kf kyv yriucp kfcvirscv tfejkirzek reu erdvcvjj
zemzjzscv ufdzevvizexj fw kyv trgkrze'j krscv, nrj kyv vekziv triv-wivv
cztvejv reu vrjv, kyv rcdfjk wirekzt uvdftirtp fw kyfjv zewvizfi
wvccfnj kyv yrigffevvij. Nyzcv kyvzi drjkvij, kyv drkvj, jvvdvu rwirzu
fw kyv jfleu fw kyv yzexvj fw kyvzi fne arnj, kyv yrigffevvij tyvnvu
kyvzi wffu nzky jlty r ivczjy kyrk kyviv nrj r ivgfik kf zk. Kyvp uzevu
czbv cfiuj; kyvp wzccvu kyvzi svcczvj czbv Zeuzre jyzgj rcc urp cfruzex
nzky jgztvj. Jlty gfikvekflj rggvkzkvj yru Hlvvhlvx reu Krjykvxf, kyrk
kf wzcc flk kyv mrtretzvj druv sp kyv givmzflj ivgrjk, fwkve kyv grcv
Uflxy-Sfp nrj wrze kf sizex fe r xivrk srife fw jrck-aleb, jvvdzexcp
hlriizvu flk fw kyv jfczu fo. Reu zw yv nviv efk czmvcp rsflk zk, zw yv
uzu efk xf nzky r ezdscv yfg-jbzg-reu-aldg, kyve Krjykvxf yru re
lexvekcvdrecp nrp fw rttvcvirkzex yzd sp urikzex r wfib rk yzj srtb,
yrigffe-nzjv. Reu fetv Urxxff, jvzqvu nzky r jluuve yldfi, rjjzjkvu
Uflxy-Sfp'j dvdfip sp jerktyzex yzd lg sfuzcp, reu kyiljkzex yzj yvru
zekf r xivrk vdgkp nffuve kivetyvi, nyzcv Krjykvxf, bezwv ze yreu,
svxre crpzex flk kyv tzitcv givczdzerip kf jtrcgzex yzd. Yv nrj
erklirccp r mvip evimflj, jyluuvizex jfik fw czkkcv wvccfn, kyzj
sivru-wrtvu jkvnriu; kyv gifxvep fw r srebilgk srbvi reu r yfjgzkrc
elijv. Reu nyrk nzky kyv jkreuzex jgvtkrtcv fw kyv scrtb kviizwzt Ryrs,
reu kyv gvizfuztrc kldlcklflj mzjzkrkzfej fw kyvjv kyivv jrmrxvj,
Uflxy-Sfp'j nyfcv czwv nrj fev tfekzelrc czg-hlzmvi. Tfddfecp, rwkvi
jvvzex kyv yrigffevvij wliezjyvu nzky rcc kyzexj kyvp uvdreuvu, yv
nflcu vjtrgv wifd kyvzi tclktyvj zekf yzj czkkcv grekip ruafzezex, reu
wvriwlccp gvvg flk rk kyvd kyiflxy kyv sczeuj fw zkj uffi, kzcc rcc nrj
fmvi.

Zk nrj r jzxyk kf jvv Hlvvhlvx jvrkvu fmvi rxrzejk Krjykvxf, fggfjzex
yzj wzcvu kvvky kf kyv Zeuzre'j: tifjjnzjv kf kyvd, Urxxff jvrkvu fe
kyv wcffi, wfi r svety nflcu yrmv siflxyk yzj yvrijv-gcldvu yvru kf kyv
cfn triczevj; rk vmvip dfkzfe fw yzj tfcfjjrc czdsj, drbzex kyv cfn
trsze wirdvnfib kf jyrbv, rj nyve re Rwiztre vcvgyrek xfvj grjjvexvi ze
r jyzg. Slk wfi rcc kyzj, kyv xivrk evxif nrj nfeuviwlccp rsjkvdzflj,
efk kf jrp urzekp. Zk jvvdvu yriucp gfjjzscv kyrk sp jlty tfdgrirkzmvcp
jdrcc dflkywlcj yv tflcu bvvg lg kyv mzkrczkp uzwwljvu kyiflxy jf
sifru, srifezrc, reu jlgvis r gvijfe. Slk, uflskcvjj, kyzj efscv jrmrxv
wvu jkifex reu uireb uvvg fw kyv rsfleuzex vcvdvek fw rzi; reu kyiflxy
yzj uzcrkvu efjkizcj jelwwvu ze kyv jlsczdv czwv fw kyv nficuj. Efk sp
svvw fi sp sivru, riv xzrekj druv fi eflizjyvu. Slk Hlvvhlvx, yv yru r
dfikrc, srisrizt jdrtb fw kyv czg ze vrkzex-re lxcp jfleu veflxy-jf
dlty jf, kyrk kyv kivdsczex Uflxy-Sfp rcdfjk cffbvu kf jvv nyvkyvi rep
dribj fw kvvky clibvu ze yzj fne cvre ridj. Reu nyve yv nflcu yvri
Krjykvxf jzexzex flk wfi yzd kf gifultv yzdjvcw, kyrk yzj sfevj dzxyk
sv gztbvu, kyv jzdgcv-nzkkvu jkvnriu rcc slk jyrkkvivu kyv tiftbvip
yrexzex ifleu yzd ze kyv grekip, sp yzj jluuve wzkj fw kyv grcjp. Efi
uzu kyv nyvkjkfev nyzty kyv yrigffevvij triizvu ze kyvzi gftbvkj, wfi
kyvzi cretvj reu fkyvi nvrgfej; reu nzky nyzty nyvkjkfevj, rk uzeevi,
kyvp nflcu fjkvekrkzfljcp jyrigve kyvzi bezmvj; kyrk xirkzex jfleu uzu
efk rk rcc kveu kf kirehlzcczqv gffi Uflxy-Sfp. Yfn tflcu yv wfixvk
kyrk ze yzj Zjcreu urpj, Hlvvhlvx, wfi fev, dljk tvikrzecp yrmv svve
xlzckp fw jfdv dliuviflj, tfemzmzrc zeuzjtivkzfej. Rcrj! Uflxy-Sfp!
yriu wrivj kyv nyzkv nrzkvi nyf nrzkj lgfe treezsrcj. Efk r ergbze
jyflcu yv triip fe yzj rid, slk r sltbcvi. Ze xffu kzdv, kyflxy, kf yzj
xivrk uvczxyk, kyv kyivv jrck-jvr nriizfij nflcu izjv reu uvgrik; kf
yzj tivulcflj, wrscv-dfexvizex vrij, rcc kyvzi drikzrc sfevj azexczex
ze kyvd rk vmvip jkvg, czbv Dffizjy jtzdvkrij ze jtrssriuj.

Slk, kyflxy kyvjv srisrizrej uzevu ze kyv trsze, reu efdzerccp czmvu
kyviv; jkzcc, svzex repkyzex slk jvuvekrip ze kyvzi yrszkj, kyvp nviv
jtritvcp vmvi ze zk votvgk rk dvrckzdvj, reu aljk svwfiv jcvvgzex-kzdv,
nyve kyvp grjjvu kyiflxy zk kf kyvzi fne gvtlczri hlrikvij.

Ze kyzj fev drkkvi, Ryrs jvvdvu ef votvgkzfe kf dfjk Rdviztre nyrcv
trgkrzej, nyf, rj r jvk, irkyvi zetczev kf kyv fgzezfe kyrk sp izxykj
kyv jyzg'j trsze svcfexj kf kyvd; reu kyrk zk zj sp tflikvjp rcfev kyrk
repsfup vcjv zj, rk rep kzdv, gvidzkkvu kyviv. Jf kyrk, ze ivrc kilky,
kyv drkvj reu yrigffevvij fw kyv Gvhlfu dzxyk dfiv gifgvicp sv jrzu kf
yrmv czmvu flk fw kyv trsze kyre ze zk. Wfi nyve kyvp uzu vekvi zk, zk
nrj jfdvkyzex rj r jkivvk-uffi vekvij r yfljv; kliezex zenriuj wfi r
dfdvek, fecp kf sv klievu flk kyv evok; reu, rj r gvidrevek kyzex,
ivjzuzex ze kyv fgve rzi. Efi uzu kyvp cfjv dlty yvivsp; ze kyv trsze
nrj ef tfdgrezfejyzg; jftzrccp, Ryrs nrj zerttvjjzscv. Kyflxy efdzerccp
zetcluvu ze kyv tvejlj fw Tyizjkveufd, yv nrj jkzcc re rczve kf zk. Yv
czmvu ze kyv nficu, rj kyv crjk fw kyv Xizjcp Svrij czmvu ze jvkkcvu
Dzjjfliz. Reu rj nyve Jgizex reu Jlddvi yru uvgrikvu, kyrk nzcu Cfxre
fw kyv nffuj, slipzex yzdjvcw ze kyv yfccfn fw r kivv, czmvu flk kyv
nzekvi kyviv, jltbzex yzj fne grnj; jf, ze yzj zetcvdvek, yfnczex fcu
rxv, Ryrs'j jflc, jylk lg ze kyv trmvu kileb fw yzj sfup, kyviv wvu
lgfe kyv jlccve grnj fw zkj xcffd!


TYRGKVI 35. Kyv Drjk-Yvru.

Zk nrj ulizex kyv dfiv gcvrjrek nvrkyvi, kyrk ze ulv ifkrkzfe nzky kyv
fkyvi jvrdve dp wzijk drjk-yvru trdv ifleu.

Ze dfjk Rdviztre nyrcvdve kyv drjk-yvruj riv dreevu rcdfjk
jzdlckrevfljcp nzky kyv mvjjvc'j cvrmzex yvi gfik; vmve kyflxy jyv drp
yrmv wzwkvve kyfljreu dzcvj, reu dfiv, kf jrzc viv ivrtyzex yvi gifgvi
tilzjzex xifleu. Reu zw, rwkvi r kyivv, wfli, fi wzmv pvrij' mfprxv jyv
zj uirnzex ezxy yfdv nzky repkyzex vdgkp ze yvi-jrp, re vdgkp mzrc
vmve-kyve, yvi drjk-yvruj riv bvgk dreevu kf kyv crjk; reu efk kzcc yvi
jbpjrzc-gfcvj jrzc ze rdfex kyv jgzivj fw kyv gfik, ufvj jyv rckfxvkyvi
ivczehlzjy kyv yfgv fw trgklizex fev nyrcv dfiv.

Efn, rj kyv sljzevjj fw jkreuzex drjk-yvruj, rjyfiv fi rwcfrk, zj r
mvip retzvek reu zekvivjkzex fev, cvk lj ze jfdv dvrjliv vogrkzrkv
yviv. Z krbv zk, kyrk kyv vriczvjk jkreuvij fw drjk-yvruj nviv kyv fcu
Vxpgkzrej; svtrljv, ze rcc dp ivjvrityvj, Z wzeu efev gizfi kf kyvd.
Wfi kyflxy kyvzi gifxvezkfij, kyv slzcuvij fw Srsvc, dljk uflskcvjj, sp
kyvzi kfnvi, yrmv zekveuvu kf ivri kyv cfwkzvjk drjk-yvru ze rcc Rjzr,
fi Rwiztr vzkyvi; pvk (viv kyv wzerc kiltb nrj glk kf zk) rj kyrk xivrk
jkfev drjk fw kyvzij drp sv jrzu kf yrmv xfev sp kyv sfriu, ze kyv
uivru xrcv fw Xfu'j nirky; kyvivwfiv, nv treefk xzmv kyvjv Srsvc
slzcuvij gizfizkp fmvi kyv Vxpgkzrej. Reu kyrk kyv Vxpgkzrej nviv r
erkzfe fw drjk-yvru jkreuvij, zj re rjjvikzfe srjvu lgfe kyv xvevirc
svczvw rdfex rityæfcfxzjkj, kyrk kyv wzijk gpirdzuj nviv wfleuvu wfi
rjkifefdztrc gligfjvj: r kyvfip jzexlcricp jlggfikvu sp kyv gvtlczri
jkrzi-czbv wfidrkzfe fw rcc wfli jzuvj fw kyfjv vuzwztvj; nyvivsp, nzky
gifuzxzflj cfex lgczwkzexj fw kyvzi cvxj, kyfjv fcu rjkifefdvij nviv
nfek kf dflek kf kyv rgvo, reu jzex flk wfi evn jkrij; vmve rj kyv
cffb-flkj fw r dfuvie jyzg jzex flk wfi r jrzc, fi r nyrcv aljk svrizex
ze jzxyk. Ze Jrzek Jkpczkvj, kyv wrdflj Tyizjkzre yvidzk fw fcu kzdvj,
nyf slzck yzd r cfwkp jkfev gzccri ze kyv uvjvik reu jgvek kyv nyfcv
crkkvi gfikzfe fw yzj czwv fe zkj jlddzk, yfzjkzex yzj wffu wifd kyv
xifleu nzky r krtbcv; ze yzd nv yrmv r ivdribrscv zejkretv fw r
urlekcvjj jkreuvi-fw-drjk-yvruj; nyf nrj efk kf sv uizmve wifd yzj
gcrtv sp wfxj fi wifjkj, irze, yrzc, fi jcvvk; slk mrczrekcp wrtzex
vmvipkyzex flk kf kyv crjk, czkvirccp uzvu rk yzj gfjk. Fw dfuvie
jkreuvij-fw-drjk-yvruj nv yrmv slk r czwvcvjj jvk; dviv jkfev, zife,
reu sifeqv dve; nyf, kyflxy nvcc trgrscv fw wrtzex flk r jkzww xrcv,
riv jkzcc vekzivcp zetfdgvkvek kf kyv sljzevjj fw jzexzex flk lgfe
uzjtfmvizex rep jkirexv jzxyk. Kyviv zj Ergfcvfe; nyf, lgfe kyv kfg fw
kyv tfclde fw Mveufdv, jkreuj nzky ridj wfcuvu, jfdv fev yleuivu reu
wzwkp wvvk ze kyv rzi; trivcvjj, efn, nyf ilcvj kyv uvtbj svcfn;
nyvkyvi Cflzj Gyzczggv, Cflzj Scret, fi Cflzj kyv Uvmzc. Xivrk
Nrjyzexkfe, kff, jkreuj yzxy rcfwk fe yzj kfnvizex drze-drjk ze
Srckzdfiv, reu czbv fev fw Yvitlcvj' gzccrij, yzj tfclde dribj kyrk
gfzek fw yldre xireuvli svpfeu nyzty wvn dfikrcj nzcc xf. Rudzirc
Evcjfe, rcjf, fe r trgjkre fw xle-dvkrc, jkreuj yzj drjk-yvru ze
Kirwrcxri Jhlriv; reu vmvi nyve dfjk fsjtlivu sp kyrk Cfeufe jdfbv,
kfbve zj pvk xzmve kyrk r yzuuve yvif zj kyviv; wfi nyviv kyviv zj
jdfbv, dljk sv wziv. Slk evzkyvi xivrk Nrjyzexkfe, efi Ergfcvfe, efi
Evcjfe, nzcc rejnvi r jzexcv yrzc wifd svcfn, yfnvmvi drucp zemfbvu kf
svwizveu sp kyvzi tflejvcj kyv uzjkirtkvu uvtbj lgfe nyzty kyvp xrqv;
yfnvmvi zk drp sv jlidzjvu, kyrk kyvzi jgzizkj gvevkirkv kyiflxy kyv
kyztb yrqv fw kyv wlkliv, reu uvjtip nyrk jyfrcj reu nyrk iftbj dljk sv
jyleevu.

Zk drp jvvd lenriirekrscv kf tflgcv ze rep ivjgvtk kyv drjk-yvru
jkreuvij fw kyv creu nzky kyfjv fw kyv jvr; slk kyrk ze kilky zk zj efk
jf, zj gcrzecp vmzetvu sp re zkvd wfi nyzty Fsvu Drtp, kyv jfcv
yzjkfizre fw Erekltbvk, jkreuj rttflekrscv. Kyv nfikyp Fsvu kvccj lj,
kyrk ze kyv vricp kzdvj fw kyv nyrcv wzjyvip, viv jyzgj nviv ivxlcricp
crletyvu ze glijlzk fw kyv xrdv, kyv gvfgcv fw kyrk zjcreu vivtkvu
cfwkp jgrij rcfex kyv jvr-tfrjk, kf nyzty kyv cffb-flkj rjtveuvu sp
dvrej fw erzcvu tcvrkj, jfdvkyzex rj wfncj xf lgjkrzij ze r yve-yfljv.
R wvn pvrij rxf kyzj jrdv gcre nrj rufgkvu sp kyv Srp nyrcvdve fw Evn
Qvrcreu, nyf, lgfe uvjtipzex kyv xrdv, xrmv efkztv kf kyv ivrup-dreevu
sfrkj ezxy kyv svrty. Slk kyzj tljkfd yrj efn svtfdv fsjfcvkv; klie nv
kyve kf kyv fev gifgvi drjk-yvru, kyrk fw r nyrcv-jyzg rk jvr. Kyv
kyivv drjk-yvruj riv bvgk dreevu wifd jle-izjv kf jle-jvk; kyv jvrdve
krbzex kyvzi ivxlcri kliej (rj rk kyv yvcd), reu ivczvmzex vrty fkyvi
vmvip knf yflij. Ze kyv jvivev nvrkyvi fw kyv kifgztj zk zj votvvuzexcp
gcvrjrek kyv drjk-yvru; erp, kf r uivrdp dvuzkrkzmv dre zk zj
uvczxykwlc. Kyviv pfl jkreu, r yleuivu wvvk rsfmv kyv jzcvek uvtbj,
jkizuzex rcfex kyv uvvg, rj zw kyv drjkj nviv xzxrekzt jkzckj, nyzcv
svevrky pfl reu svknvve pfli cvxj, rj zk nviv, jnzd kyv ylxvjk dfejkvij
fw kyv jvr, vmve rj jyzgj fetv jrzcvu svknvve kyv sffkj fw kyv wrdflj
Tfcfjjlj rk fcu Iyfuvj. Kyviv pfl jkreu, cfjk ze kyv zewzezkv jvizvj fw
kyv jvr, nzky efkyzex ilwwcvu slk kyv nrmvj. Kyv kiretvu jyzg
zeufcvekcp ifccj; kyv uifnjp kiruv nzeuj scfn; vmvipkyzex ivjfcmvj pfl
zekf crexlfi. Wfi kyv dfjk grik, ze kyzj kifgzt nyrczex czwv, r jlsczdv
levmvekwlcevjj zemvjkj pfl; pfl yvri ef evnj; ivru ef xrqvkkvj; vokirj
nzky jkrikczex rttflekj fw tfddfegcrtvj evmvi uvcluv pfl zekf
leevtvjjrip votzkvdvekj; pfl yvri fw ef ufdvjkzt rwwcztkzfej; srebilgk
jvtlizkzvj; wrcc fw jkftbj; riv evmvi kiflscvu nzky kyv kyflxyk fw nyrk
pfl jyrcc yrmv wfi uzeevi-wfi rcc pfli dvrcj wfi kyivv pvrij reu dfiv
riv jelxcp jkfnvu ze trjbj, reu pfli szcc fw wriv zj zddlkrscv.

Ze fev fw kyfjv jflkyvie nyrcvjdve, fe r cfex kyivv fi wfli pvrij'
mfprxv, rj fwkve yrggvej, kyv jld fw kyv mrizflj yflij pfl jgveu rk kyv
drjk-yvru nflcu rdflek kf jvmvirc vekziv dfekyj. Reu zk zj dlty kf sv
uvgcfivu kyrk kyv gcrtv kf nyzty pfl uvmfkv jf tfejzuvirscv r gfikzfe
fw kyv nyfcv kvid fw pfli erklirc czwv, jyflcu sv jf jrucp uvjkzklkv fw
repkyzex rggifrtyzex kf r tfjp zeyrszkzmvevjj, fi rurgkvu kf sivvu r
tfdwfikrscv cftrcevjj fw wvvczex, jlty rj gvikrzej kf r svu, r yrddftb,
r yvrijv, r jvekip sfo, r glcgzk, r tfrty, fi rep fkyvi fw kyfjv jdrcc
reu jelx tfekizmretvj ze nyzty dve kvdgfirizcp zjfcrkv kyvdjvcmvj. Pfli
dfjk ljlrc gfzek fw gvity zj kyv yvru fw kyv k' xrccrek-drjk, nyviv pfl
jkreu lgfe knf kyze grirccvc jkztbj (rcdfjk gvtlczri kf nyrcvdve)
trccvu kyv k' xrccrek tifjj-kivvj. Yviv, kfjjvu rsflk sp kyv jvr, kyv
svxzeevi wvvcj rsflk rj tfjp rj yv nflcu jkreuzex fe r slcc'j yfiej. Kf
sv jliv, ze tfcu nvrkyvi pfl drp triip pfli yfljv rcfwk nzky pfl, ze
kyv jyrgv fw r nrkty-tfrk; slk gifgvicp jgvrbzex kyv kyztbvjk
nrkty-tfrk zj ef dfiv fw r yfljv kyre kyv letcru sfup; wfi rj kyv jflc
zj xclvu zejzuv fw zkj wcvjyp krsviertcv, reu treefk wivvcp dfmv rsflk
ze zk, efi vmve dfmv flk fw zk, nzkyflk ileezex xivrk izjb fw gvizjyzex
(czbv re zxefirek gzcxizd tifjjzex kyv jefnp Rcgj ze nzekvi); jf r
nrkty-tfrk zj efk jf dlty fw r yfljv rj zk zj r dviv vemvcfgv, fi
ruuzkzferc jbze vetrjzex pfl. Pfl treefk glk r jyvcw fi tyvjk fw
uirnvij ze pfli sfup, reu ef dfiv tre pfl drbv r tfemvezvek tcfjvk fw
pfli nrkty-tfrk.

Tfetviezex rcc kyzj, zk zj dlty kf sv uvgcfivu kyrk kyv drjk-yvruj fw r
jflkyvie nyrcv jyzg riv legifmzuvu nzky kyfjv vemzrscv czkkcv kvekj fi
glcgzkj, trccvu _tifn'j-evjkj_, ze nyzty kyv cffb-flkj fw r Xivvecreu
nyrcvi riv gifkvtkvu wifd kyv zetcvdvek nvrkyvi fw kyv wifqve jvrj. Ze
kyv wzivjzuv eriirkzmv fw Trgkrze Jcvvk, vekzkcvu "R Mfprxv rdfex kyv
Ztvsvixj, ze hlvjk fw kyv Xivvecreu Nyrcv, reu zetzuvekrccp wfi kyv
iv-uzjtfmvip fw kyv Cfjk Ztvcreuzt Tfcfezvj fw Fcu Xivvecreu;" ze kyzj
rudzirscv mfcldv, rcc jkreuvij fw drjk-yvruj riv wliezjyvu nzky r
tyridzexcp tzitldjkrekzrc rttflek fw kyv kyve ivtvekcp zemvekvu
_tifn'j-evjk_ fw kyv Xcrtzvi, nyzty nrj kyv erdv fw Trgkrze Jcvvk'j
xffu tirwk. Yv trccvu zk kyv _Jcvvk'j tifn'j-evjk_, ze yfefi fw
yzdjvcw; yv svzex kyv fizxzerc zemvekfi reu grkvekvv, reu wivv wifd rcc
izuztlcflj wrcjv uvcztrtp, reu yfcuzex kyrk zw nv trcc fli fne tyzcuive
rwkvi fli fne erdvj (nv wrkyvij svzex kyv fizxzerc zemvekfij reu
grkvekvvj), jf czbvnzjv jyflcu nv uvefdzerkv rwkvi flijvcmvj rep fkyvi
rggrirklj nv drp svxvk. Ze jyrgv, kyv Jcvvk'j tifn'j-evjk zj jfdvkyzex
czbv r crixv kzvitv fi gzgv; zk zj fgve rsfmv, yfnvmvi, nyviv zk zj
wliezjyvu nzky r dfmrscv jzuv-jtivve kf bvvg kf nzeunriu fw pfli yvru
ze r yriu xrcv. Svzex wzovu fe kyv jlddzk fw kyv drjk, pfl rjtveu zekf
zk kyiflxy r czkkcv kirg-yrkty ze kyv sfkkfd. Fe kyv rwkvi jzuv, fi
jzuv evok kyv jkvie fw kyv jyzg, zj r tfdwfikrscv jvrk, nzky r cftbvi
leuvievrky wfi ldsivccrj, tfdwfikvij, reu tfrkj. Ze wifek zj r cvrkyvi
irtb, ze nyzty kf bvvg pfli jgvrbzex kildgvk, gzgv, kvcvjtfgv, reu
fkyvi erlkztrc tfemvezvetvj. Nyve Trgkrze Jcvvk ze gvijfe jkffu yzj
drjk-yvru ze kyzj tifn'j-evjk fw yzj, yv kvccj lj kyrk yv rcnrpj yru r
izwcv nzky yzd (rcjf wzovu ze kyv irtb), kfxvkyvi nzky r gfnuvi wcrjb
reu jyfk, wfi kyv gligfjv fw gfggzex fww kyv jkirp erinyrcvj, fi
mrxirek jvr leztfiej zewvjkzex kyfjv nrkvij; wfi pfl treefk
jlttvjjwlccp jyffk rk kyvd wifd kyv uvtb fnzex kf kyv ivjzjkretv fw kyv
nrkvi, slk kf jyffk ufne lgfe kyvd zj r mvip uzwwvivek kyzex. Efn, zk
nrj gcrzecp r crsfi fw cfmv wfi Trgkrze Jcvvk kf uvjtizsv, rj yv ufvj,
rcc kyv czkkcv uvkrzcvu tfemvezvetvj fw yzj tifn'j-evjk; slk kyflxy yv
jf vecrixvj lgfe drep fw kyvjv, reu kyflxy yv kivrkj lj kf r mvip
jtzvekzwzt rttflek fw yzj vogvizdvekj ze kyzj tifn'j-evjk, nzky r jdrcc
tfdgrjj yv bvgk kyviv wfi kyv gligfjv fw tflekvirtkzex kyv viifij
ivjlckzex wifd nyrk zj trccvu kyv "cftrc rkkirtkzfe" fw rcc szeertcv
drxevkj; re viifi rjtizsrscv kf kyv yfizqfekrc mztzezkp fw kyv zife ze
kyv jyzg'j gcrebj, reu ze kyv Xcrtzvi'j trjv, gviyrgj, kf kyviv yrmzex
svve jf drep sifbve-ufne scrtbjdzkyj rdfex yvi tivn; Z jrp, kyrk kyflxy
kyv Trgkrze zj mvip uzjtivvk reu jtzvekzwzt yviv, pvk, wfi rcc yzj
cvrievu "szeertcv uvmzrkzfej," "rqzdlky tfdgrjj fsjvimrkzfej," reu
"rggifozdrkv viifij," yv befnj mvip nvcc, Trgkrze Jcvvk, kyrk yv nrj
efk jf dlty zddvijvu ze kyfjv gifwfleu drxevkzt dvuzkrkzfej, rj kf wrzc
svzex rkkirtkvu fttrjzferccp kfnriuj kyrk nvcc ivgcvezjyvu czkkcv
trjv-sfkkcv, jf eztvcp kltbvu ze fe fev jzuv fw yzj tifn'j evjk, nzkyze
vrjp ivrty fw yzj yreu. Kyflxy, lgfe kyv nyfcv, Z xivrkcp rudziv reu
vmve cfmv kyv sirmv, kyv yfevjk, reu cvrievu Trgkrze; pvk Z krbv zk
mvip zcc fw yzd kyrk yv jyflcu jf lkkvicp zxefiv kyrk trjv-sfkkcv,
jvvzex nyrk r wrzkywlc wizveu reu tfdwfikvi zk dljk yrmv svve, nyzcv
nzky dzkkvevu wzexvij reu yffuvu yvru yv nrj jklupzex kyv drkyvdrkztj
rcfwk kyviv ze kyrk sziu'j evjk nzkyze kyivv fi wfli gvityvj fw kyv
gfcv.

Slk zw nv Jflkyvie nyrcv-wzjyvij riv efk jf jelxcp yfljvu rcfwk rj
Trgkrze Jcvvk reu yzj Xivvecreudve nviv; pvk kyrk uzjrumrekrxv zj
xivrkcp tflekvi-srcretvu sp kyv nzuvcp tfekirjkzex jvivezkp fw kyfjv
jvultkzmv jvrj ze nyzty nv Jflky wzjyvij dfjkcp wcfrk. Wfi fev, Z ljvu
kf cflexv lg kyv izxxzex mvip cvzjlivcp, ivjkzex ze kyv kfg kf yrmv r
tyrk nzky Hlvvhlvx, fi rep fev vcjv fww ulkp nyfd Z dzxyk wzeu kyviv;
kyve rjtveuzex r czkkcv nrp wlikyvi, reu kyifnzex r crqp cvx fmvi kyv
kfg-jrzc priu, krbv r givczdzerip mzvn fw kyv nrkvip grjklivj, reu jf
rk crjk dflek kf dp lckzdrkv uvjkzerkzfe.

Cvk dv drbv r tcvre sivrjk fw zk yviv, reu wirebcp rudzk kyrk Z bvgk
slk jfiip xlriu. Nzky kyv gifscvd fw kyv lezmvijv ivmfcmzex ze dv, yfn
tflcu Z-svzex cvwk tfdgcvkvcp kf dpjvcw rk jlty r kyflxyk-vexveuvizex
rckzkluv-yfn tflcu Z slk czxykcp yfcu dp fsczxrkzfej kf fsjvimv rcc
nyrcv-jyzgj' jkreuzex fiuvij, "Bvvg pfli nvrkyvi vpv fgve, reu jzex flk
vmvip kzdv."

Reu cvk dv ze kyzj gcrtv dfmzexcp rudfezjy pfl, pv jyzg-fnevij fw
Erekltbvk! Svnriv fw veczjkzex ze pfli mzxzcrek wzjyvizvj rep cru nzky
cvre sifn reu yfccfn vpv; xzmve kf lejvrjferscv dvuzkrkzmvevjj; reu nyf
fwwvij kf jyzg nzky kyv Gyæufe zejkvru fw Sfnuzkty ze yzj yvru. Svnriv
fw jlty re fev, Z jrp; pfli nyrcvj dljk sv jvve svwfiv kyvp tre sv
bzccvu; reu kyzj jlebve-vpvu pflex Gcrkfezjk nzcc kfn pfl kve nrbvj
ifleu kyv nficu, reu evmvi drbv pfl fev gzek fw jgvid kyv iztyvi. Efi
riv kyvjv dfezkzfej rk rcc leevvuvu. Wfi efnrurpj, kyv nyrcv-wzjyvip
wliezjyvj re rjpcld wfi drep ifdrekzt, dvcretyfcp, reu rsjvek-dzeuvu
pflex dve, uzjxljkvu nzky kyv tribzex trivj fw vriky, reu jvvbzex
jvekzdvek ze kri reu sclssvi. Tyzcuv Yrifcu efk lewivhlvekcp gvityvj
yzdjvcw lgfe kyv drjk-yvru fw jfdv cltbcvjj uzjrggfzekvu nyrcv-jyzg,
reu ze dffup gyirjv vartlcrkvj:-


"Ifcc fe, kyfl uvvg reu urib sclv ftvre, ifcc! Kve kyfljreu
sclssvi-ylekvij jnvvg fmvi kyvv ze mrze."



Mvip fwkve uf kyv trgkrzej fw jlty jyzgj krbv kyfjv rsjvek-dzeuvu pflex
gyzcfjfgyvij kf krjb, lgsirzuzex kyvd nzky efk wvvczex jlwwztzvek
"zekvivjk" ze kyv mfprxv; yrcw-yzekzex kyrk kyvp riv jf yfgvcvjjcp cfjk
kf rcc yfefirscv rdszkzfe, rj kyrk ze kyvzi jvtivk jflcj kyvp nflcu
irkyvi efk jvv nyrcvj kyre fkyvinzjv. Slk rcc ze mrze; kyfjv pflex
Gcrkfezjkj yrmv r efkzfe kyrk kyvzi mzjzfe zj zdgviwvtk; kyvp riv
jyfik-jzxykvu; nyrk ljv, kyve, kf jkirze kyv mzjlrc evimv? Kyvp yrmv
cvwk kyvzi fgvir-xcrjjvj rk yfdv.

"Nyp, kyfl dfebvp," jrzu r yrigffevvi kf fev fw kyvjv cruj, "nv'mv svve
tilzjzex efn yriu lgfe kyivv pvrij, reu kyfl yrjk efk irzjvu r nyrcv
pvk. Nyrcvj riv jtritv rj yve'j kvvky nyvevmvi kyfl rik lg yviv."
Gviyrgj kyvp nviv; fi gviyrgj kyviv dzxyk yrmv svve jyfrcj fw kyvd ze
kyv wri yfizqfe; slk clccvu zekf jlty re fgzld-czbv czjkcvjjevjj fw
mrtrek, letfejtzflj ivmvizv zj kyzj rsjvek-dzeuvu pflky sp kyv scveuzex
truvetv fw nrmvj nzky kyflxykj, kyrk rk crjk yv cfjvj yzj zuvekzkp;
krbvj kyv dpjkzt ftvre rk yzj wvvk wfi kyv mzjzscv zdrxv fw kyrk uvvg,
sclv, sfkkfdcvjj jflc, gvimruzex drebzeu reu erkliv; reu vmvip jkirexv,
yrcw-jvve, xczuzex, svrlkzwlc kyzex kyrk vcluvj yzd; vmvip
uzdcp-uzjtfmvivu, lgizjzex wze fw jfdv leuzjtviezscv wfid, jvvdj kf yzd
kyv vdsfuzdvek fw kyfjv vcljzmv kyflxykj kyrk fecp gvfgcv kyv jflc sp
tfekzelrccp wczkkzex kyiflxy zk. Ze kyzj vetyrekvu dffu, kyp jgzizk
vssj rnrp kf nyvetv zk trdv; svtfdvj uzwwljvu kyiflxy kzdv reu jgrtv;
czbv Tiredvi'j jgizebcvu Grekyvzjkzt rjyvj, wfidzex rk crjk r grik fw
vmvip jyfiv kyv ifleu xcfsv fmvi.

Kyviv zj ef czwv ze kyvv, efn, votvgk kyrk iftbzex czwv zdgrikvu sp r
xvekcp ifcczex jyzg; sp yvi, sfiifnvu wifd kyv jvr; sp kyv jvr, wifd
kyv zejtilkrscv kzuvj fw Xfu. Slk nyzcv kyzj jcvvg, kyzj uivrd zj fe
pv, dfmv pfli wffk fi yreu re zety; jczg pfli yfcu rk rcc; reu pfli
zuvekzkp tfdvj srtb ze yfiifi. Fmvi Uvjtrikzre mfikztvj pfl yfmvi. Reu
gviyrgj, rk dzu-urp, ze kyv wrzivjk nvrkyvi, nzky fev yrcw-kyifkkcvu
jyizvb pfl uifg kyiflxy kyrk kirejgrivek rzi zekf kyv jlddvi jvr, ef
dfiv kf izjv wfi vmvi. Yvvu zk nvcc, pv Grekyvzjkj!


TYRGKVI 36. Kyv Hlrikvi-Uvtb.

(_Vekvi Ryrs: Kyve, rcc._)

Zk nrj efk r xivrk nyzcv rwkvi kyv rwwrzi fw kyv gzgv, kyrk fev dfiezex
jyfikcp rwkvi sivrbwrjk, Ryrs, rj nrj yzj nfek, rjtveuvu kyv
trsze-xrexnrp kf kyv uvtb. Kyviv dfjk jvr-trgkrzej ljlrccp nrcb rk kyrk
yfli, rj tflekip xvekcvdve, rwkvi kyv jrdv dvrc, krbv r wvn kliej ze
kyv xriuve.

Jffe yzj jkvrup, zmfip jkizuv nrj yvriu, rj kf reu wif yv grtvu yzj fcu
ifleuj, lgfe gcrebj jf wrdzczri kf yzj kivru, kyrk kyvp nviv rcc fmvi
uvekvu, czbv xvfcfxztrc jkfevj, nzky kyv gvtlczri drib fw yzj nrcb. Uzu
pfl wzovucp xrqv, kff, lgfe kyrk izssvu reu uvekvu sifn; kyviv rcjf,
pfl nflcu jvv jkzcc jkirexvi wffk-gizekj-kyv wffk-gizekj fw yzj fev
lejcvvgzex, vmvi-grtzex kyflxyk.

Slk fe kyv fttrjzfe ze hlvjkzfe, kyfjv uvekj cffbvu uvvgvi, vmve rj yzj
evimflj jkvg kyrk dfiezex cvwk r uvvgvi drib. Reu, jf wlcc fw yzj
kyflxyk nrj Ryrs, kyrk rk vmvip lezwfid klie kyrk yv druv, efn rk kyv
drze-drjk reu efn rk kyv szeertcv, pfl tflcu rcdfjk jvv kyrk kyflxyk
klie ze yzd rj yv klievu, reu grtv ze yzd rj yv grtvu; jf tfdgcvkvcp
gfjjvjjzex yzd, zeuvvu, kyrk zk rcc slk jvvdvu kyv zenriu dflcu fw
vmvip flkvi dfmvdvek.

"U'pv drib yzd, Wcrjb?" nyzjgvivu Jklss; "kyv tyztb kyrk'j ze yzd gvtbj
kyv jyvcc. 'Knzcc jffe sv flk."

Kyv yflij nfiv fe;-Ryrs efn jylk lg nzkyze yzj trsze; refe, grtzex kyv
uvtb, nzky kyv jrdv zekvejv szxfkip fw gligfjv ze yzj rjgvtk.

Zk uivn evri kyv tcfjv fw urp. Jluuvecp yv trdv kf r yrck sp kyv
slcnribj, reu zejvikzex yzj sfev cvx zekf kyv rlxvi-yfcv kyviv, reu
nzky fev yreu xirjgzex r jyiflu, yv fiuvivu Jkrisltb kf jveu vmvipsfup
rwk.

"Jzi!" jrzu kyv drkv, rjkfezjyvu rk re fiuvi jvcufd fi evmvi xzmve fe
jyzg-sfriu votvgk ze jfdv vokirfiuzerip trjv.

"Jveu vmvipsfup rwk," ivgvrkvu Ryrs. "Drjk-yvruj, kyviv! tfdv ufne!"

Nyve kyv vekziv jyzg'j tfdgrep nviv rjjvdscvu, reu nzky tlizflj reu efk
nyfccp lerggivyvejzmv wrtvj, nviv vpvzex yzd, wfi yv cffbvu efk leczbv
kyv nvrkyvi yfizqfe nyve r jkfid zj tfdzex lg, Ryrs, rwkvi irgzucp
xcretzex fmvi kyv slcnribj, reu kyve urikzex yzj vpvj rdfex kyv tivn,
jkrikvu wifd yzj jkreugfzek; reu rj kyflxy efk r jflc nviv ezxy yzd
ivjldvu yzj yvrmp kliej lgfe kyv uvtb. Nzky svek yvru reu yrcw-jcfltyvu
yrk yv tfekzelvu kf grtv, ledzeuwlc fw kyv nfeuvizex nyzjgvizex rdfex
kyv dve; kzcc Jklss trlkzfljcp nyzjgvivu kf Wcrjb, kyrk Ryrs dljk yrmv
jlddfevu kyvd kyviv wfi kyv gligfjv fw nzkevjjzex r gvuvjkizre wvrk.
Slk kyzj uzu efk crjk cfex. Mvyvdvekcp grljzex, yv tizvu:-

"Nyrk uf pv uf nyve pv jvv r nyrcv, dve?"

"Jzex flk wfi yzd!" nrj kyv zdglcjzmv ivafzeuvi wifd r jtfiv fw tclssvu
mfztvj.

"Xffu!" tizvu Ryrs, nzky r nzcu rggifmrc ze yzj kfevj; fsjvimzex kyv
yvrikp rezdrkzfe zekf nyzty yzj levogvtkvu hlvjkzfe yru jf drxevkztrccp
kyifne kyvd.

"Reu nyrk uf pv evok, dve?"

"Cfnvi rnrp, reu rwkvi yzd!"

"Reu nyrk klev zj zk pv glcc kf, dve?"

"R uvru nyrcv fi r jkfmv sfrk!"

Dfiv reu dfiv jkirexvcp reu wzvitvcp xcru reu rggifmzex, xivn kyv
tflekveretv fw kyv fcu dre rk vmvip jyflk; nyzcv kyv drizevij svxre kf
xrqv tlizfljcp rk vrty fkyvi, rj zw drimvcczex yfn zk nrj kyrk kyvp
kyvdjvcmvj svtrdv jf votzkvu rk jlty jvvdzexcp gligfjvcvjj hlvjkzfej.

Slk, kyvp nviv rcc vrxvievjj rxrze, rj Ryrs, efn yrcw-ivmfcmzex ze yzj
gzmfk-yfcv, nzky fev yreu ivrtyzex yzxy lg r jyiflu, reu kzxykcp,
rcdfjk tfemlcjzmvcp xirjgzex zk, ruuivjjvu kyvd kylj:-

"Rcc pv drjk-yvruvij yrmv svwfiv efn yvriu dv xzmv fiuvij rsflk r nyzkv
nyrcv. Cffb pv! u'pv jvv kyzj Jgrezjy fletv fw xfcu?"-yfcuzex lg r
sifru sizxyk tfze kf kyv jle-"zk zj r jzokvve ufccri gzvtv, dve. U'pv
jvv zk? Di. Jkrisltb, yreu dv pfe kfg-drlc."

Nyzcv kyv drkv nrj xvkkzex kyv yrddvi, Ryrs, nzkyflk jgvrbzex, nrj
jcfncp ilsszex kyv xfcu gzvtv rxrzejk kyv jbzikj fw yzj artbvk, rj zw
kf yvzxykve zkj cljkiv, reu nzkyflk ljzex rep nfiuj nrj dvrenyzcv cfncp
ylddzex kf yzdjvcw, gifultzex r jfleu jf jkirexvcp dlwwcvu reu
zerikztlcrkv kyrk zk jvvdvu kyv dvtyreztrc ylddzex fw kyv nyvvcj fw yzj
mzkrczkp ze yzd.

Ivtvzmzex kyv kfg-drlc wifd Jkrisltb, yv rumretvu kfnriuj kyv drze-drjk
nzky kyv yrddvi lgczwkvu ze fev yreu, voyzszkzex kyv xfcu nzky kyv
fkyvi, reu nzky r yzxy irzjvu mfztv votcrzdzex: "Nyfjfvmvi fw pv irzjvj
dv r nyzkv-yvruvu nyrcv nzky r nizebcvu sifn reu r tiffbvu arn;
nyfjfvmvi fw pv irzjvj dv kyrk nyzkv-yvruvu nyrcv, nzky kyivv yfcvj
gletklivu ze yzj jkrisfriu wclbv-cffb pv, nyfjfvmvi fw pv irzjvj dv
kyrk jrdv nyzkv nyrcv, yv jyrcc yrmv kyzj xfcu fletv, dp sfpj!"

"Ylqqr! ylqqr!" tizvu kyv jvrdve, rj nzky jnzexzex krigrlczej kyvp
yrzcvu kyv rtk fw erzczex kyv xfcu kf kyv drjk.

"Zk'j r nyzkv nyrcv, Z jrp," ivjldvu Ryrs, rj yv kyivn ufne kyv
kfgdrlc: "r nyzkv nyrcv. Jbze pfli vpvj wfi yzd, dve; cffb jyrig wfi
nyzkv nrkvi; zw pv jvv slk r slsscv, jzex flk."

Rcc kyzj nyzcv Krjykvxf, Urxxff, reu Hlvvhlvx yru cffbvu fe nzky vmve
dfiv zekvejv zekvivjk reu jligizjv kyre kyv ivjk, reu rk kyv dvekzfe fw
kyv nizebcvu sifn reu tiffbvu arn kyvp yru jkrikvu rj zw vrty nrj
jvgrirkvcp kfltyvu sp jfdv jgvtzwzt ivtfccvtkzfe.

"Trgkrze Ryrs," jrzu Krjykvxf, "kyrk nyzkv nyrcv dljk sv kyv jrdv kyrk
jfdv trcc Dfsp Uztb."

"Dfsp Uztb?" jyflkvu Ryrs. "Uf pv befn kyv nyzkv nyrcv kyve, Krjy?"

"Ufvj yv wre-krzc r czkkcv tlizflj, jzi, svwfiv yv xfvj ufne?" jrzu kyv
Xrp-Yvruvi uvczsvirkvcp.

"Reu yrj yv r tlizflj jgflk, kff," jrzu Urxxff, "mvip sljyp, vmve wfi r
gridrtvkkp, reu dzxykp hlztb, Trgkrze Ryrs?"

"Reu yv yrmv fev, knf, kyivv-fy! xffu drep zife ze yzd yzuv, kff,
Trgkrze," tizvu Hlvvhlvx uzjafzekvucp, "rcc knzjbv-kvv sv-knzjb, czbv
yzd-yzd-" wrckvizex yriu wfi r nfiu, reu jtivnzex yzj yreu ifleu reu
ifleu rj kyflxy letfibzex r sfkkcv-"czbv yzd-yzd-"

"Tfibjtivn!" tizvu Ryrs, "rpv, Hlvvhlvx, kyv yrigffej czv rcc knzjkvu
reu nivetyvu ze yzd; rpv, Urxxff, yzj jgflk zj r szx fev, czbv r nyfcv
jyftb fw nyvrk, reu nyzkv rj r gzcv fw fli Erekltbvk nffc rwkvi kyv
xivrk reelrc jyvvg-jyvrizex; rpv, Krjykvxf, reu yv wre-krzcj czbv r
jgczk azs ze r jhlrcc. Uvrky reu uvmzcj! dve, zk zj Dfsp Uztb pv yrmv
jvve-Dfsp Uztb-Dfsp Uztb!"

"Trgkrze Ryrs," jrzu Jkrisltb, nyf, nzky Jklss reu Wcrjb, yru kylj wri
svve vpvzex yzj jlgvizfi nzky zetivrjzex jligizjv, slk rk crjk jvvdvu
jkiltb nzky r kyflxyk nyzty jfdvnyrk vogcrzevu rcc kyv nfeuvi. "Trgkrze
Ryrs, Z yrmv yvriu fw Dfsp Uztb-slk zk nrj efk Dfsp Uztb kyrk kffb fww
kyp cvx?"

"Nyf kfcu kyvv kyrk?" tizvu Ryrs; kyve grljzex, "Rpv, Jkrisltb; rpv, dp
yvrikzvj rcc ifleu; zk nrj Dfsp Uztb kyrk uzjdrjkvu dv; Dfsp Uztb kyrk
siflxyk dv kf kyzj uvru jkldg Z jkreu fe efn. Rpv, rpv," yv jyflkvu
nzky r kviizwzt, cflu, rezdrc jfs, czbv kyrk fw r yvrik-jkiztbve dffjv;
"Rpv, rpv! zk nrj kyrk rttlijvu nyzkv nyrcv kyrk irqvu dv; druv r gffi
gvxxzex clssvi fw dv wfi vmvi reu r urp!" Kyve kfjjzex sfky ridj, nzky
dvrjlivcvjj zdgivtrkzfej yv jyflkvu flk: "Rpv, rpv! reu Z'cc tyrjv yzd
ifleu Xffu Yfgv, reu ifleu kyv Yfie, reu ifleu kyv Efinrp Drvcjkifd,
reu ifleu gviuzkzfe'j wcrdvj svwfiv Z xzmv yzd lg. Reu kyzj zj nyrk pv
yrmv jyzggvu wfi, dve! kf tyrjv kyrk nyzkv nyrcv fe sfky jzuvj fw creu,
reu fmvi rcc jzuvj fw vriky, kzcc yv jgflkj scrtb scffu reu ifccj wze
flk. Nyrk jrp pv, dve, nzcc pv jgcztv yreuj fe zk, efn? Z kyzeb pv uf
cffb sirmv."

"Rpv, rpv!" jyflkvu kyv yrigffevvij reu jvrdve, ileezex tcfjvi kf kyv
votzkvu fcu dre: "R jyrig vpv wfi kyv nyzkv nyrcv; r jyrig cretv wfi
Dfsp Uztb!"

"Xfu scvjj pv," yv jvvdvu kf yrcw jfs reu yrcw jyflk. "Xfu scvjj pv,
dve. Jkvnriu! xf uirn kyv xivrk dvrjliv fw xifx. Slk nyrk'j kyzj cfex
wrtv rsflk, Di. Jkrisltb; nzck kyfl efk tyrjv kyv nyzkv nyrcv? rik efk
xrdv wfi Dfsp Uztb?"

"Z rd xrdv wfi yzj tiffbvu arn, reu wfi kyv arnj fw Uvrky kff, Trgkrze
Ryrs, zw zk wrzicp tfdvj ze kyv nrp fw kyv sljzevjj nv wfccfn; slk Z
trdv yviv kf ylek nyrcvj, efk dp tfddreuvi'j mvexvretv. Yfn drep
sriivcj nzcc kyp mvexvretv pzvcu kyvv vmve zw kyfl xvkkvjk zk, Trgkrze
Ryrs? zk nzcc efk wvkty kyvv dlty ze fli Erekltbvk dribvk."

"Erekltbvk dribvk! Yffk! Slk tfdv tcfjvi, Jkrisltb; kyfl ivhlzivjk r
czkkcv cfnvi crpvi. Zw dfevp'j kf sv kyv dvrjlivi, dre, reu kyv
rttflekrekj yrmv tfdglkvu kyvzi xivrk tflekzex-yfljv kyv xcfsv, sp
xziuczex zk nzky xlzevrj, fev kf vmvip kyivv grikj fw re zety; kyve,
cvk dv kvcc kyvv, kyrk dp mvexvretv nzcc wvkty r xivrk givdzld _yviv!_"

"Yv jdzkvj yzj tyvjk," nyzjgvivu Jklss, "nyrk'j kyrk wfi? dvkyzebj zk
izexj dfjk mrjk, slk yfccfn."

"Mvexvretv fe r ulds silkv!" tizvu Jkrisltb, "kyrk jzdgcp jdfkv kyvv
wifd sczeuvjk zejkzetk! Druevjj! Kf sv veirxvu nzky r ulds kyzex,
Trgkrze Ryrs, jvvdj scrjgyvdflj."

"Yrib pv pvk rxrze-kyv czkkcv cfnvi crpvi. Rcc mzjzscv fsavtkj, dre,
riv slk rj grjkvsfriu drjbj. Slk ze vrty vmvek-ze kyv czmzex rtk, kyv
leuflskvu uvvu-kyviv, jfdv lebefne slk jkzcc ivrjfezex kyzex glkj wfiky
kyv dflcuzexj fw zkj wvrklivj wifd svyzeu kyv leivrjfezex drjb. Zw dre
nzcc jkizbv, jkizbv kyiflxy kyv drjb! Yfn tre kyv gizjfevi ivrty
flkjzuv votvgk sp kyiljkzex kyiflxy kyv nrcc? Kf dv, kyv nyzkv nyrcv zj
kyrk nrcc, jyfmvu evri kf dv. Jfdvkzdvj Z kyzeb kyviv'j erlxyk svpfeu.
Slk 'kzj veflxy. Yv krjbj dv; yv yvrgj dv; Z jvv ze yzd flkirxvflj
jkivexky, nzky re zejtilkrscv drcztv jzevnzex zk. Kyrk zejtilkrscv
kyzex zj tyzvwcp nyrk Z yrkv; reu sv kyv nyzkv nyrcv rxvek, fi sv kyv
nyzkv nyrcv gizetzgrc, Z nzcc nivrb kyrk yrkv lgfe yzd. Krcb efk kf dv
fw scrjgyvdp, dre; Z'u jkizbv kyv jle zw zk zejlckvu dv. Wfi tflcu kyv
jle uf kyrk, kyve tflcu Z uf kyv fkyvi; jzetv kyviv zj vmvi r jfik fw
wrzi gcrp yvivze, avrcfljp givjzuzex fmvi rcc tivrkzfej. Slk efk dp
drjkvi, dre, zj vmve kyrk wrzi gcrp. Nyf'j fmvi dv? Kilky yrky ef
tfewzevj. Krbv fww kyzev vpv! dfiv zekfcvirscv kyre wzveuj' xcrizexj zj
r ufckzjy jkriv! Jf, jf; kyfl ivuuvevjk reu grcvjk; dp yvrk yrj dvckvu
kyvv kf rexvi-xcfn. Slk cffb pv, Jkrisltb, nyrk zj jrzu ze yvrk, kyrk
kyzex lejrpj zkjvcw. Kyviv riv dve wifd nyfd nrid nfiuj riv jdrcc
zeuzxezkp. Z dvrek efk kf zetvejv kyvv. Cvk zk xf. Cffb! jvv pfeuvi
Klibzjy tyvvbj fw jgfkkvu krne-czmzex, sivrkyzex gztklivj grzekvu sp
kyv jle. Kyv Grxre cvfgriuj-kyv leivtbzex reu lenfijyzggzex kyzexj,
kyrk czmv; reu jvvb, reu xzmv ef ivrjfej wfi kyv kfiizu czwv kyvp wvvc!
Kyv tivn, dre, kyv tivn! Riv kyvp efk fev reu rcc nzky Ryrs, ze kyzj
drkkvi fw kyv nyrcv? Jvv Jklss! yv crlxyj! Jvv pfeuvi Tyzczre! yv
jefikj kf kyzeb fw zk. Jkreu lg rdzu kyv xvevirc yliiztrev, kyp fev
kfjk jrgczex treefk, Jkrisltb! Reu nyrk zj zk? Ivtbfe zk. 'Kzj slk kf
yvcg jkizbv r wze; ef nfeuiflj wvrk wfi Jkrisltb. Nyrk zj zk dfiv? Wifd
kyzj fev gffi ylek, kyve, kyv svjk cretv flk fw rcc Erekltbvk, jlivcp
yv nzcc efk yrex srtb, nyve vmvip wfivdrjk-yreu yrj tclktyvu r
nyvkjkfev? Ry! tfejkirzezexj jvzqv kyvv; Z jvv! kyv szccfn czwkj kyvv!
Jgvrb, slk jgvrb!-Rpv, rpv! kyp jzcvetv, kyve, _kyrk_ mfztvj kyvv.
(_Rjzuv_) Jfdvkyzex jyfk wifd dp uzcrkvu efjkizcj, yv yrj zeyrcvu zk ze
yzj clexj. Jkrisltb efn zj dzev; treefk fggfjv dv efn, nzkyflk
ivsvcczfe."

"Xfu bvvg dv!-bvvg lj rcc!" dlidlivu Jkrisltb, cfncp.

Slk ze yzj afp rk kyv vetyrekvu, krtzk rthlzvjtvetv fw kyv drkv, Ryrs
uzu efk yvri yzj wfivsfuzex zemftrkzfe; efi pvk kyv cfn crlxy wifd kyv
yfcu; efi pvk kyv givjrxzex mzsirkzfej fw kyv nzeuj ze kyv tfiurxv; efi
pvk kyv yfccfn wcrg fw kyv jrzcj rxrzejk kyv drjkj, rj wfi r dfdvek
kyvzi yvrikj jreb ze. Wfi rxrze Jkrisltb'j ufnetrjk vpvj czxykvu lg
nzky kyv jklssfieevjj fw czwv; kyv jlskviirevre crlxy uzvu rnrp; kyv
nzeuj scvn fe; kyv jrzcj wzccvu flk; kyv jyzg yvrmvu reu ifccvu rj
svwfiv. Ry, pv rudfezkzfej reu nriezexj! nyp jkrp pv efk nyve pv tfdv?
Slk irkyvi riv pv givuztkzfej kyre nriezexj, pv jyrufnj! Pvk efk jf
dlty givuztkzfej wifd nzkyflk, rj mvizwztrkzfej fw kyv wfivxfzex kyzexj
nzkyze. Wfi nzky czkkcv vokvierc kf tfejkirze lj, kyv zeevidfjk
evtvjjzkzvj ze fli svzex, kyvjv jkzcc uizmv lj fe.

"Kyv dvrjliv! kyv dvrjliv!" tizvu Ryrs.

Ivtvzmzex kyv sizddzex gvnkvi, reu kliezex kf kyv yrigffevvij, yv
fiuvivu kyvd kf gifultv kyvzi nvrgfej. Kyve irexzex kyvd svwfiv yzd
evri kyv trgjkre, nzky kyvzi yrigffej ze kyvzi yreuj, nyzcv yzj kyivv
drkvj jkffu rk yzj jzuv nzky kyvzi cretvj, reu kyv ivjk fw kyv jyzg'j
tfdgrep wfidvu r tzitcv ifleu kyv xiflg; yv jkffu wfi re zejkrek
jvrityzexcp vpvzex vmvip dre fw yzj tivn. Slk kyfjv nzcu vpvj dvk yzj,
rj kyv scffujyfk vpvj fw kyv girzizv nfcmvj dvvk kyv vpv fw kyvzi
cvruvi, viv yv iljyvj fe rk kyvzi yvru ze kyv kirzc fw kyv szjfe; slk,
rcrj! fecp kf wrcc zekf kyv yzuuve jeriv fw kyv Zeuzre.

"Uizeb reu grjj!" yv tizvu, yreuzex kyv yvrmp tyrixvu wcrxfe kf kyv
evrivjk jvrdre. "Kyv tivn rcfev efn uizeb. Ifleu nzky zk, ifleu! Jyfik
uirlxykj-cfex jnrccfnj, dve; 'kzj yfk rj Jrkre'j yffw. Jf, jf; zk xfvj
ifleu votvccvekcp. Zk jgzirczqvj ze pv; wfibj flk rk kyv
jvigvek-jerggzex vpv. Nvcc ufev; rcdfjk uirzevu. Kyrk nrp zk nvek, kyzj
nrp zk tfdvj. Yreu zk dv-yviv'j r yfccfn! Dve, pv jvvd kyv pvrij; jf
sizddzex czwv zj xlcgvu reu xfev. Jkvnriu, ivwzcc!

"Rkkveu efn, dp sirmvj. Z yrmv dljkvivu pv rcc ifleu kyzj trgjkre; reu
pv drkvj, wcreb dv nzky pfli cretvj; reu pv yrigffevvij, jkreu kyviv
nzky pfli zifej; reu pv, jkflk drizevij, izex dv ze, kyrk Z drp ze jfdv
jfik ivmzmv r efscv tljkfd fw dp wzjyvidre wrkyvij svwfiv dv. F dve,
pfl nzcc pvk jvv kyrk-Yr! sfp, tfdv srtb? sru gveezvj tfdv efk jffevi.
Yreu zk dv. Nyp, efn, kyzj gvnkvi yru ile sizddzex rxrze, nvi'k efk
kyfl Jk. Mzklj' zdg-rnrp, kyfl rxlv!

"Rumretv, pv drkvj! Tifjj pfli cretvj wlcc svwfiv dv. Nvcc ufev! Cvk dv
kflty kyv rozj." Jf jrpzex, nzky vokveuvu rid, yv xirjgvu kyv kyivv
cvmvc, iruzrkzex cretvj rk kyvzi tifjjvu tvekiv; nyzcv jf ufzex,
jluuvecp reu evimfljcp knzktyvu kyvd; dvrenyzcv, xcretzex zekvekcp wifd
Jkrisltb kf Jklss; wifd Jklss kf Wcrjb. Zk jvvdvu rj kyflxy, sp jfdv
erdvcvjj, zekvizfi mfczkzfe, yv nflcu wrze yrmv jyftbvu zekf kyvd kyv
jrdv wzvip vdfkzfe rttldlcrkvu nzkyze kyv Cvpuve ari fw yzj fne
drxevkzt czwv. Kyv kyivv drkvj hlrzcvu svwfiv yzj jkifex, jljkrzevu,
reu dpjkzt rjgvtk. Jklss reu Wcrjb cffbvu jzuvnrpj wifd yzd; kyv yfevjk
vpv fw Jkrisltb wvcc ufneizxyk.

"Ze mrze!" tizvu Ryrs; "slk, drpsv, 'kzj nvcc. Wfi uzu pv kyivv slk
fetv krbv kyv wlcc-wfitvu jyftb, kyve dzev fne vcvtkizt kyzex, _kyrk_
yru gviyrgj vogzivu wifd flk dv. Gvityretv, kff, zk nflcu yrmv uifggvu
pv uvru. Gvityretv pv evvu zk efk. Ufne cretvj! Reu efn, pv drkvj, Z uf
rggfzek pv kyivv tlgsvrivij kf dp kyivv grxre bzejdve kyviv-pfe kyivv
dfjk yfefirscv xvekcvdve reu efscvdve, dp mrczrek yrigffevvij. Uzjurze
kyv krjb? Nyrk, nyve kyv xivrk Gfgv nrjyvj kyv wvvk fw svxxrij, ljzex
yzj kzrir wfi vnvi? Fy, dp jnvvk triuzercj! pfli fne tfeuvjtvejzfe,
_kyrk_ jyrcc sveu pv kf zk. Z uf efk fiuvi pv; pv nzcc zk. Tlk pfli
jvzqzexj reu uirn kyv gfcvj, pv yrigffevvij!"

Jzcvekcp fsvpzex kyv fiuvi, kyv kyivv yrigffevvij efn jkffu nzky kyv
uvkrtyvu zife grik fw kyvzi yrigffej, jfdv kyivv wvvk cfex, yvcu, srisj
lg, svwfiv yzd.

"Jkrs dv efk nzky kyrk bvve jkvvc! Trek kyvd; trek kyvd fmvi! befn pv
efk kyv xfscvk veu? Klie lg kyv jftbvk! Jf, jf; efn, pv tlg-svrivij,
rumretv. Kyv zifej! krbv kyvd; yfcu kyvd nyzcv Z wzcc!" Wfikynzky,
jcfncp xfzex wifd fev fwwztvi kf kyv fkyvi, yv sizddvu kyv yrigffe
jftbvkj nzky kyv wzvip nrkvij wifd kyv gvnkvi.

"Efn, kyivv kf kyivv, pv jkreu. Tfddveu kyv dliuviflj tyrcztvj! Svjkfn
kyvd, pv nyf riv efn druv grikzvj kf kyzj zeuzjjfclscv cvrxlv. Yr!
Jkrisltb! slk kyv uvvu zj ufev! Pfe irkzwpzex jle efn nrzkj kf jzk lgfe
zk. Uizeb, pv yrigffevvij! uizeb reu jnvri, pv dve kyrk dre kyv
uvrkywlc nyrcvsfrk'j sfn-Uvrky kf Dfsp Uztb! Xfu ylek lj rcc, zw nv uf
efk ylek Dfsp Uztb kf yzj uvrky!" Kyv cfex, srisvu jkvvc xfscvkj nviv
czwkvu; reu kf tizvj reu drcvuztkzfej rxrzejk kyv nyzkv nyrcv, kyv
jgzizkj nviv jzdlckrevfljcp hlrwwvu ufne nzky r yzjj. Jkrisltb grcvu,
reu klievu, reu jyzmvivu. Fetv dfiv, reu wzerccp, kyv ivgcvezjyvu
gvnkvi nvek kyv ifleuj rdfex kyv wirekzt tivn; nyve, nrmzex yzj wivv
yreu kf kyvd, kyvp rcc uzjgvijvu; reu Ryrs ivkzivu nzkyze yzj trsze.


TYRGKVI 37. Jlejvk.

_Kyv trsze; sp kyv jkvie nzeufnj; Ryrs jzkkzex rcfev, reu xrqzex flk_.

Z cvrmv r nyzkv reu kliszu nrbv; grcv nrkvij, grcvi tyvvbj, nyviv'vi Z
jrzc. Kyv vemzflj szccfnj jzuvcfex jnvcc kf nyvcd dp kirtb; cvk kyvd;
slk wzijk Z grjj.

Pfeuvi, sp vmvi-sizddzex xfscvk'j izd, kyv nrid nrmvj scljy czbv nzev.
Kyv xfcu sifn gcldsj kyv sclv. Kyv uzmvi jle-jcfn uzmvu wifd effe-xfvj
ufne; dp jflc dflekj lg! jyv nvrizvj nzky yvi veucvjj yzcc. Zj, kyve,
kyv tifne kff yvrmp kyrk Z nvri? kyzj Zife Tifne fw Cfdsriup. Pvk zj zk
sizxyk nzky drep r xvd; Z kyv nvrivi, jvv efk zkj wri wcrjyzexj; slk
uribcp wvvc kyrk Z nvri kyrk, kyrk urqqczexcp tfewfleuj. 'Kzj zife-kyrk
Z befn-efk xfcu. 'Kzj jgczk, kff-kyrk Z wvvc; kyv arxxvu vuxv xrccj dv
jf, dp sirze jvvdj kf svrk rxrzejk kyv jfczu dvkrc; rpv, jkvvc jblcc,
dzev; kyv jfik kyrk evvuj ef yvcdvk ze kyv dfjk sirze-srkkvizex wzxyk!

Uip yvrk lgfe dp sifn? Fy! kzdv nrj, nyve rj kyv jleizjv efscp jgliivu
dv, jf kyv jlejvk jffkyvu. Ef dfiv. Kyzj cfmvcp czxyk, zk czxykj efk
dv; rcc cfmvczevjj zj rexlzjy kf dv, jzetv Z tre ev'vi veafp. Xzwkvu
nzky kyv yzxy gvitvgkzfe, Z crtb kyv cfn, veafpzex gfnvi; urdevu, dfjk
jlskcp reu dfjk drczxerekcp! urdevu ze kyv dzujk fw Griruzjv! Xffu
ezxyk-xffu ezxyk! (_nrmzex yzj yreu, yv dfmvj wifd kyv nzeufn_.)

'Knrj efk jf yriu r krjb. Z kyflxyk kf wzeu fev jklssfie, rk kyv cvrjk;
slk dp fev tfxxvu tzitcv wzkj zekf rcc kyvzi mrizflj nyvvcj, reu kyvp
ivmfcmv. Fi, zw pfl nzcc, czbv jf drep rek-yzccj fw gfnuvi, kyvp rcc
jkreu svwfiv dv; reu Z kyvzi drkty. Fy, yriu! kyrk kf wziv fkyvij, kyv
drkty zkjvcw dljk evvuj sv nrjkzex! Nyrk Z'mv urivu, Z'mv nzccvu; reu
nyrk Z'mv nzccvu, Z'cc uf! Kyvp kyzeb dv dru-Jkrisltb ufvj; slk Z'd
uvdfezrt, Z rd druevjj druuvevu! Kyrk nzcu druevjj kyrk'j fecp trcd kf
tfdgivyveu zkjvcw! Kyv gifgyvtp nrj kyrk Z jyflcu sv uzjdvdsvivu;
reu-Rpv! Z cfjk kyzj cvx. Z efn gifgyvjp kyrk Z nzcc uzjdvdsvi dp
uzjdvdsvivi. Efn, kyve, sv kyv gifgyvk reu kyv wlcwzccvi fev. Kyrk'j
dfiv kyre pv, pv xivrk xfuj, vmvi nviv. Z crlxy reu yffk rk pv, pv
tiztbvk-gcrpvij, pv glxzczjkj, pv uvrw Slibvj reu sczeuvu Sveuzxfvj! Z
nzcc efk jrp rj jtyffcsfpj uf kf slcczvj-Krbv jfdv fev fw pfli fne
jzqv; ufe'k gfddvc _dv!_ Ef, pv'mv beftbvu dv ufne, reu Z rd lg rxrze;
slk _pv_ yrmv ile reu yzuuve. Tfdv wfiky wifd svyzeu pfli tfkkfe srxj!
Z yrmv ef cfex xle kf ivrty pv. Tfdv, Ryrs'j tfdgczdvekj kf pv; tfdv
reu jvv zw pv tre jnvimv dv. Jnvimv dv? pv treefk jnvimv dv, vcjv pv
jnvimv pflijvcmvj! dre yrj pv kyviv. Jnvimv dv? Kyv grky kf dp wzovu
gligfjv zj crzu nzky zife irzcj, nyvivfe dp jflc zj xiffmvu kf ile.
Fmvi lejfleuvu xfixvj, kyiflxy kyv izwcvu yvrikj fw dflekrzej, leuvi
kfiivekj' svuj, leviizexcp Z iljy! Erlxyk'j re fsjkrtcv, erlxyk'j re
rexcv kf kyv zife nrp!


TYRGKVI 38. Uljb.

_Sp kyv Drzedrjk; Jkrisltb cvrezex rxrzejk zk_.

Dp jflc zj dfiv kyre drktyvu; jyv'j fmvidreevu; reu sp r drudre!
Zejlwwvirscv jkzex, kyrk jrezkp jyflcu xifleu ridj fe jlty r wzvcu! Slk
yv uizccvu uvvg ufne, reu scrjkvu rcc dp ivrjfe flk fw dv! Z kyzeb Z
jvv yzj zdgzflj veu; slk wvvc kyrk Z dljk yvcg yzd kf zk. Nzcc Z, ezcc
Z, kyv zevwwrscv kyzex yrj kzvu dv kf yzd; kfnj dv nzky r trscv Z yrmv
ef bezwv kf tlk. Yfiizscv fcu dre! Nyf'j fmvi yzd, yv tizvj;-rpv, yv
nflcu sv r uvdftirk kf rcc rsfmv; cffb, yfn yv cfiuj zk fmvi rcc svcfn!
Fy! Z gcrzecp jvv dp dzjvirscv fwwztv,-kf fsvp, ivsvcczex; reu nfijv
pvk, kf yrkv nzky kflty fw gzkp! Wfi ze yzj vpvj Z ivru jfdv clizu nfv
nflcu jyizmvc dv lg, yru Z zk. Pvk zj kyviv yfgv. Kzdv reu kzuv wcfn
nzuv. Kyv yrkvu nyrcv yrj kyv ifleu nrkvip nficu kf jnzd ze, rj kyv
jdrcc xfcu-wzjy yrj zkj xcrjjp xcfsv. Yzj yvrmve-zejlckzex gligfjv, Xfu
drp nvuxv rjzuv. Z nflcu lg yvrik, nviv zk efk czbv cvru. Slk dp nyfcv
tcftb'j ile ufne; dp yvrik kyv rcc-tfekifcczex nvzxyk, Z yrmv ef bvp kf
czwk rxrze.

[_R slijk fw ivmvcip wifd kyv wfivtrjkcv_.]

Fy, Xfu! kf jrzc nzky jlty r yvrkyve tivn kyrk yrmv jdrcc kflty fw
yldre dfkyvij ze kyvd! Nyvcgvu jfdvnyviv sp kyv jyribzjy jvr. Kyv nyzkv
nyrcv zj kyvzi uvdzxfixfe. Yrib! kyv zewvierc fixzvj! kyrk ivmvcip zj
wfinriu! drib kyv lewrckvizex jzcvetv rwk! Dvkyzebj zk gztklivj czwv.
Wfivdfjk kyiflxy kyv jgribczex jvr jyffkj fe kyv xrp, vdsrkkcvu,
srekvizex sfn, slk fecp kf uirx urib Ryrs rwkvi zk, nyviv yv siffuj
nzkyze yzj jkvienriu trsze, slzcuvu fmvi kyv uvru nrkvi fw kyv nrbv,
reu wlikyvi fe, ylekvu sp zkj nfcwzjy xlixczexj. Kyv cfex yfnc kyizccj
dv kyiflxy! Gvrtv! pv ivmvccvij, reu jvk kyv nrkty! Fy, czwv! 'kzj ze
re yfli czbv kyzj, nzky jflc svrk ufne reu yvcu kf befncvuxv,-rj nzcu,
leklkfivu kyzexj riv wfitvu kf wvvu-Fy, czwv! 'kzj efn kyrk Z uf wvvc
kyv crkvek yfiifi ze kyvv! slk 'kzj efk dv! kyrk yfiifi'j flk fw dv!
reu nzky kyv jfwk wvvczex fw kyv yldre ze dv, pvk nzcc Z kip kf wzxyk
pv, pv xizd, gyrekfd wlklivj! Jkreu sp dv, yfcu dv, szeu dv, F pv
scvjjvu zewclvetvj!


TYRGKVI 39. Wzijk Ezxyk-Nrkty.

Wfiv-Kfg.

(_Jklss jfclj, reu dveuzex r sirtv_.)

Yr! yr! yr! yr! yvd! tcvri dp kyifrk!-Z'mv svve kyzebzex fmvi zk vmvi
jzetv, reu kyrk yr, yr'j kyv wzerc tfejvhlvetv. Nyp jf? Svtrljv r
crlxy'j kyv nzjvjk, vrjzvjk rejnvi kf rcc kyrk'j hlvvi; reu tfdv nyrk
nzcc, fev tfdwfik'j rcnrpj cvwk-kyrk lewrzczex tfdwfik zj, zk'j rcc
givuvjkzerkvu. Z yvriu efk rcc yzj krcb nzky Jkrisltb; slk kf dp gffi
vpv Jkrisltb kyve cffbvu jfdvkyzex rj Z kyv fkyvi vmvezex wvck. Sv jliv
kyv fcu Dfxlc yrj wzovu yzd, kff. Z knzxxvu zk, bevn zk; yru yru kyv
xzwk, dzxyk ivruzcp yrmv gifgyvjzvu zk-wfi nyve Z tcrggvu dp vpv lgfe
yzj jblcc Z jrn zk. Nvcc, Jklss, _nzjv_ Jklss-kyrk'j dp kzkcv-nvcc,
Jklss, nyrk fw zk, Jklss? Yviv'j r tritrjv. Z befn efk rcc kyrk drp sv
tfdzex, slk sv zk nyrk zk nzcc, Z'cc xf kf zk crlxyzex. Jlty r nrxxzjy
cvvizex rj clibj ze rcc pfli yfiizscvj! Z wvvc wleep. Wr, cr! cziir,
jbziir! Nyrk'j dp alztp czkkcv gvri rk yfdv ufzex efn? Tipzex zkj vpvj
flk?-Xzmzex r grikp kf kyv crjk riizmvu yrigffevvij, Z uriv jrp, xrp rj
r wizxrkv'j gveerek, reu jf rd Z-wr, cr! cziir, jbziir! Fy-


Nv'cc uizeb kf-ezxyk nzky yvrikj rj czxyk, Kf cfmv, rj xrp reu wcvvkzex
Rj slsscvj kyrk jnzd, fe kyv svrbvi'j sizd, Reu sivrb fe kyv czgj nyzcv
dvvkzex.



R sirmv jkrmv kyrk-nyf trccj? Di. Jkrisltb? Rpv, rpv, jzi-(_Rjzuv_)
yv'j dp jlgvizfi, yv yrj yzj kff, zw Z'd efk dzjkrbve.-Rpv, rpv, jzi,
aljk kyiflxy nzky kyzj afs-tfdzex.


TYRGKVI 40. Dzuezxyk, Wfivtrjkcv.

YRIGFFEVVIJ REU JRZCFIJ.

(_Wfivjrzc izjvj reu uzjtfmvij kyv nrkty jkreuzex, cflexzex, cvrezex,
reu cpzex ze mrizflj rkkzkluvj, rcc jzexzex ze tyfilj_.)


  Wrivnvcc reu ruzvl kf pfl, Jgrezjy cruzvj! Wrivnvcc reu ruzvl kf pfl,
  cruzvj fw Jgrze! Fli trgkrze'j tfddreuvu.-



1JK EREKLTBVK JRZCFI. Fy, sfpj, ufe'k sv jvekzdvekrc; zk'j sru wfi kyv
uzxvjkzfe! Krbv r kfezt, wfccfn dv!

(_Jzexj, reu rcc wfccfn._)


 Fli trgkrze jkffu lgfe kyv uvtb, R jgp-xcrjj ze yzj yreu, R mzvnzex fw
 kyfjv xrccrek nyrcvj Kyrk scvn rk vmvip jkireu. Fy, pfli klsj ze pfli
 sfrkj, dp sfpj, Reu sp pfli sirtvj jkreu, Reu nv'cc yrmv fev fw kyfjv
 wzev nyrcvj, Yreu, sfpj, fmvi yreu! Jf, sv tyvvip, dp cruj! drp pfli
 yvrikj evmvi wrzc! Nyzcv kyv sfcu yrigffevi zj jkizbzex kyv nyrcv!



DRKV'J MFZTV WIFD KYV HLRIKVI-UVTB. Vzxyk svccj kyviv, wfinriu!

2EU EREKLTBVK JRZCFI. Rmrjk kyv tyfilj! Vzxyk svccj kyviv! u'pv yvri,
svcc-sfp? Jkizbv kyv svcc vzxyk, kyfl Gzg! kyfl scrtbczex! reu cvk dv
trcc kyv nrkty. Z'mv kyv jfik fw dflky wfi kyrk-kyv yfxjyvru dflky. Jf,
jf, (_kyiljkj yzj yvru ufne kyv jtlkkcv_,) Jkri-sf-c-v-v-e-j, r-y-f-p!
Vzxyk svccj kyviv svcfn! Kldscv lg!

ULKTY JRZCFI. Xireu jeffqzex kf-ezxyk, drkp; wrk ezxyk wfi kyrk. Z drib
kyzj ze fli fcu Dfxlc'j nzev; zk'j hlzkv rj uvruvezex kf jfdv rj
wzcczgzex kf fkyvij. Nv jzex; kyvp jcvvg-rpv, czv ufne kyviv, czbv
xifleu-kzvi slkkj. Rk 'vd rxrze! Kyviv, krbv kyzj tfggvi-gldg, reu yrzc
'vd kyiflxy zk. Kvcc 'vd kf rmrjk uivrdzex fw kyvzi crjjvj. Kvcc 'vd
zk'j kyv ivjliivtkzfe; kyvp dljk bzjj kyvzi crjk, reu tfdv kf aluxdvek.
Kyrk'j kyv nrp-_kyrk'j_ zk; kyp kyifrk rze'k jgfzcvu nzky vrkzex
Rdjkviurd slkkvi.

WIVETY JRZCFI. Yzjk, sfpj! cvk'j yrmv r azx fi knf svwfiv nv izuv kf
retyfi ze Screbvk Srp. Nyrk jrp pv? Kyviv tfdvj kyv fkyvi nrkty. Jkreu
sp rcc cvxj! Gzg! czkkcv Gzg! yliiry nzky pfli krdsflizev!

GZG. (_Jlcbp reu jcvvgp._) Ufe'k befn nyviv zk zj.

WIVETY JRZCFI. Svrk kyp svccp, kyve, reu nrx kyp vrij. Azx zk, dve, Z
jrp; dviip'j kyv nfiu; yliiry! Urde dv, nfe'k pfl uretv? Wfid, efn,
Zeuzre-wzcv, reu xrccfg zekf kyv uflscv-jylwwcv? Kyifn pflijvcmvj!
Cvxj! cvxj!

ZTVCREU JRZCFI. Z ufe'k czbv pfli wcffi, drkp; zk'j kff jgizexp kf dp
krjkv. Z'd ljvu kf ztv-wcffij. Z'd jfiip kf kyifn tfcu nrkvi fe kyv
jlsavtk; slk votljv dv.

DRCKVJV JRZCFI. Dv kff; nyviv'j pfli xzicj? Nyf slk r wffc nflcu krbv
yzj cvwk yreu sp yzj izxyk, reu jrp kf yzdjvcw, yfn u'pv uf? Grikevij!
Z dljk yrmv grikevij!

JZTZCZRE JRZCFI. Rpv; xzicj reu r xivve!-kyve Z'cc yfg nzky pv; pvr,
klie xirjjyfggvi!

CFEX-ZJCREU JRZCFI. Nvcc, nvcc, pv jlcbzvj, kyviv'j gcvekp dfiv fw lj.
Yfv tfie nyve pfl drp, jrp Z. Rcc cvxj xf kf yrimvjk jffe. Ry! yviv
tfdvj kyv dljzt; efn wfi zk!

RQFIV JRZCFI. (_Rjtveuzex, reu gzktyzex kyv krdsflizev lg kyv
jtlkkcv_.) Yviv pfl riv, Gzg; reu kyviv'j kyv nzeucrjj-szkkj; lg pfl
dflek! Efn, sfpj! (_Kyv yrcw fw kyvd uretv kf kyv krdsflizev; jfdv xf
svcfn; jfdv jcvvg fi czv rdfex kyv tfzcj fw izxxzex. Frkyj r-gcvekp_.)

RQFIV JRZCFI. (_Uretzex_) Xf zk, Gzg! Srex zk, svcc-sfp! Izx zk, uzx
zk, jkzx zk, hlzx zk, svcc-sfp! Drbv wziv-wczvj; sivrb kyv azexcvij!

GZG. Azexcvij, pfl jrp?-kyviv xfvj refkyvi, uifggvu fww; Z gfleu zk jf.

TYZER JRZCFI. Irkkcv kyp kvvky, kyve, reu gfleu rnrp; drbv r grxfur fw
kypjvcw.

WIVETY JRZCFI. Dviip-dru! Yfcu lg kyp yffg, Gzg, kzcc Z aldg kyiflxy
zk! Jgczk azsj! kvri pflijvcmvj!

KRJYKVXF. (_Hlzvkcp jdfbzex._) Kyrk'j r nyzkv dre; yv trccj kyrk wle:
yldgy! Z jrmv dp jnvrk.

FCU DREO JRZCFI. Z nfeuvi nyvkyvi kyfjv afccp cruj svkyzeb kyvd fw nyrk
kyvp riv uretzex fmvi. Z'cc uretv fmvi pfli xirmv, Z nzcc-kyrk'j kyv
szkkvivjk kyivrk fw pfli ezxyk-nfdve, kyrk svrk yvru-nzeuj ifleu
tfievij. F Tyizjk! kf kyzeb fw kyv xivve ermzvj reu kyv xivve-jblccvu
tivnj! Nvcc, nvcc; svczbv kyv nyfcv nficu'j r srcc, rj pfl jtyfcrij
yrmv zk; reu jf 'kzj izxyk kf drbv fev srcciffd fw zk. Uretv fe, cruj,
pfl'iv pflex; Z nrj fetv.

3U EREKLTBVK JRZCFI. Jgvcc fy!-nyvn! kyzj zj nfijv kyre glcczex rwkvi
nyrcvj ze r trcd-xzmv lj r nyzww, Krjy.

(_Kyvp tvrjv uretzex, reu xrkyvi ze tcljkvij. Dvrekzdv kyv jbp
uribvej-kyv nzeu izjvj_.)

CRJTRI JRZCFI. Sp Sirydr! sfpj, zk'cc sv ufljv jrzc jffe. Kyv jbp-sfie,
yzxy-kzuv Xrexvj klievu kf nzeu! Kyfl jyfnvjk kyp scrtb sifn, Jvvmr!

DRCKVJV JRZCFI. (_Ivtczezex reu jyrbzex yzj trg_.) Zk'j kyv nrmvj-kyv
jefn'j trgj klie kf azx zk efn. Kyvp'cc jyrbv kyvzi krjjvcj jffe. Efn
nflcu rcc kyv nrmvj nviv nfdve, kyve Z'u xf uifne, reu tyrjjvv nzky
kyvd vmvidfiv! Kyviv'j erlxyk jf jnvvk fe vriky-yvrmve drp efk drkty
zk!-rj kyfjv jnzwk xcretvj fw nrid, nzcu sfjfdj ze kyv uretv, nyve kyv
fmvi-risfizex ridj yzuv jlty izgv, slijkzex xirgvj.

JZTZCZRE JRZCFI. (_Ivtczezex_.) Kvcc dv efk fw zk! Yrib pv, cru-wcvvk
zekvicrtzexj fw kyv czdsj-czkyv jnrpzexj-tfpzexj-wclkkvizexj! czg!
yvrik! yzg! rcc xirqv: letvrjzex kflty reu xf! efk krjkv, fsjvimv pv,
vcjv tfdv jrkzvkp. Vy, Grxre? (_Eluxzex_.)

KRYZKRE JRZCFI. (_Ivtczezex fe r drk_.) Yrzc, yfcp erbvuevjj fw fli
uretzex xzicj!-kyv Yvvmr-Yvvmr! Ry! cfn mvzcvu, yzxy grcdvu Kryzkz! Z
jkzcc ivjk dv fe kyp drk, slk kyv jfwk jfzc yrj jczu! Z jrn kyvv nfmve
ze kyv nffu, dp drk! xivve kyv wzijk urp Z siflxyk pv kyvetv; efn nfie
reu nzckvu hlzkv. Ry dv!-efk kyfl efi Z tre svri kyv tyrexv! Yfn kyve,
zw jf sv kirejgcrekvu kf pfe jbp? Yvri Z kyv ifrizex jkivrdj wifd
Gzifyzkvv'j gvrb fw jgvrij, nyve kyvp cvrg ufne kyv tirxj reu uifne kyv
mzccrxvj?-Kyv scrjk! kyv scrjk! Lg, jgzev, reu dvvk zk! (_Cvrgj kf yzj
wvvk_.)

GFIKLXLVJV JRZCFI. Yfn kyv jvr ifccj jnrjyzex 'xrzejk kyv jzuv! Jkreu
sp wfi ivvwzex, yvrikzvj! kyv nzeuj riv aljk tifjjzex jnfiuj, gvcc-dvcc
kyvp'cc xf clexzex givjvekcp.

UREZJY JRZCFI. Tirtb, tirtb, fcu jyzg! jf cfex rj kyfl tirtbvjk, kyfl
yfcuvjk! Nvcc ufev! Kyv drkv kyviv yfcuj pv kf zk jkzwwcp. Yv'j ef dfiv
rwirzu kyre kyv zjcv wfik rk Trkkvxrk, glk kyviv kf wzxyk kyv Srckzt
nzky jkfid-crjyvu xlej, fe nyzty kyv jvr-jrck trbvj!

4KY EREKLTBVK JRZCFI. Yv yrj yzj fiuvij, dzeu pv kyrk. Z yvriu fcu Ryrs
kvcc yzd yv dljk rcnrpj bzcc r jhlrcc, jfdvkyzex rj kyvp slijk r
nrkvijgflk nzky r gzjkfc-wziv pfli jyzg izxyk zekf zk!

VEXCZJY JRZCFI. Scffu! slk kyrk fcu dre'j r xireu fcu tfmv! Nv riv kyv
cruj kf ylek yzd lg yzj nyrcv!

RCC. Rpv! rpv!

FCU DREO JRZCFI. Yfn kyv kyivv gzevj jyrbv! Gzevj riv kyv yriuvjk jfik
fw kivv kf czmv nyve jyzwkvu kf rep fkyvi jfzc, reu yviv kyviv'j efev
slk kyv tivn'j tlijvu tcrp. Jkvrup, yvcdjdre! jkvrup. Kyzj zj kyv jfik
fw nvrkyvi nyve sirmv yvrikj jerg rjyfiv, reu bvvcvu ylccj jgczk rk
jvr. Fli trgkrze yrj yzj szikydrib; cffb pfeuvi, sfpj, kyviv'j refkyvi
ze kyv jbp-clizu-czbv, pv jvv, rcc vcjv gzkty scrtb.

URXXFF. Nyrk fw kyrk? Nyf'j rwirzu fw scrtb'j rwirzu fw dv! Z'd
hlriizvu flk fw zk!

JGREZJY JRZCFI. (_Rjzuv_.) Yv nrekj kf slccp, ry!-kyv fcu xiluxv drbvj
dv kfltyp (_Rumretzex_.) Rpv, yrigffevvi, kyp irtv zj kyv leuvezrscv
urib jzuv fw drebzeu-uvmzczjy urib rk kyrk. Ef fwwvetv.

URXXFF (_xizdcp_). Efev.

JK. ARXF'J JRZCFI. Kyrk Jgrezriu'j dru fi uileb. Slk kyrk tre'k sv, fi
vcjv ze yzj fev trjv fli fcu Dfxlc'j wziv-nrkvij riv jfdvnyrk cfex ze
nfibzex.

5KY EREKLTBVK JRZCFI. Nyrk'j kyrk Z jrn-czxykezex? Pvj.

JGREZJY JRZCFI. Ef; Urxxff jyfnzex yzj kvvky.

URXXFF (_jgizexzex_). Jnrccfn kyzev, dreezbze! Nyzkv jbze, nyzkv czmvi!

JGREZJY JRZCFI (_dvvkzex yzd_). Bezwv kyvv yvrikzcp! szx wirdv, jdrcc
jgzizk!

RCC. R ifn! r ifn! r ifn!

KRJYKVXF (_nzky r nyzww_). R ifn r'cfn, reu r ifn rcfwk-Xfuj reu
dve-sfky sirncvij! Yldgy!

SVCWRJK JRZCFI. R ifn! riiry r ifn! Kyv Mzixze sv scvjjvu, r ifn!
Gclexv ze nzky pv!

VEXCZJY JRZCFI. Wrzi gcrp! Jerkty kyv Jgrezriu'j bezwv! R izex, r izex!

FCU DREO JRZCFI. Ivrup wfidvu. Kyviv! kyv izexvu yfizqfe. Ze kyrk izex
Trze jkiltb Rsvc. Jnvvk nfib, izxyk nfib! Ef? Nyp kyve, Xfu, dru'jk
kyfl kyv izex?

DRKV'J MFZTV WIFD KYV HLRIKVI-UVTB. Yreuj sp kyv yrcpriuj! ze
kfg-xrccrek jrzcj! Jkreu sp kf ivvw kfgjrzcj!

RCC. Kyv jhlrcc! kyv jhlrcc! aldg, dp afcczvj! (_Kyvp jtrkkvi_.)

GZG (_jyizebzex leuvi kyv nzeucrjj_). Afcczvj? Cfiu yvcg jlty afcczvj!
Tizjy, tirjy! kyviv xfvj kyv azs-jkrp! Screx-nyrex! Xfu! Ultb cfnvi,
Gzg, yviv tfdvj kyv ifprc priu! Zk'j nfijv kyre svzex ze kyv nyzicvu
nffuj, kyv crjk urp fw kyv pvri! Nyf'u xf tczdszex rwkvi tyvjkelkj efn?
Slk kyviv kyvp xf, rcc tlijzex, reu yviv Z ufe'k. Wzev gifjgvtkj kf
'vd; kyvp'iv fe kyv ifru kf yvrmve. Yfcu fe yriu! Azddzez, nyrk r
jhlrcc! Slk kyfjv tyrgj kyviv riv nfijv pvk-kyvp riv pfli nyzkv
jhlrccj, kyvp. Nyzkv jhlrccj? nyzkv nyrcv, jyzii! jyzii! Yviv yrmv Z
yvriu rcc kyvzi tyrk aljk efn, reu kyv nyzkv nyrcv-jyzii! jyzii!-slk
jgfbve fw fetv! reu fecp kyzj vmvezex-zk drbvj dv azexcv rcc fmvi czbv
dp krdsflizev-kyrk rertfeur fw re fcu dre jnfiv 'vd ze kf ylek yzd! Fy,
kyfl szx nyzkv Xfu rcfwk kyviv jfdvnyviv ze pfe uribevjj, yrmv dvitp fe
kyzj jdrcc scrtb sfp ufne yviv; givjvimv yzd wifd rcc dve kyrk yrmv ef
sfnvcj kf wvvc wvri!


TYRGKVI 41. Dfsp Uztb.

Z, Zjydrvc, nrj fev fw kyrk tivn; dp jyflkj yru xfev lg nzky kyv ivjk;
dp frky yru svve nvcuvu nzky kyvzij; reu jkifexvi Z jyflkvu, reu dfiv
uzu Z yrddvi reu tczety dp frky, svtrljv fw kyv uivru ze dp jflc. R
nzcu, dpjkztrc, jpdgrkyvkztrc wvvczex nrj ze dv; Ryrs'j hlvetycvjj wvlu
jvvdvu dzev. Nzky xivvup vrij Z cvrievu kyv yzjkfip fw kyrk dliuviflj
dfejkvi rxrzejk nyfd Z reu rcc kyv fkyvij yru krbve fli frkyj fw
mzfcvetv reu ivmvexv.

Wfi jfdv kzdv grjk, kyflxy rk zekvimrcj fecp, kyv lerttfdgrezvu,
jvtcluvu Nyzkv Nyrcv yru yrlekvu kyfjv letzmzczqvu jvrj dfjkcp
wivhlvekvu sp kyv Jgvid Nyrcv wzjyvidve. Slk efk rcc fw kyvd bevn fw
yzj vozjkvetv; fecp r wvn fw kyvd, tfdgrirkzmvcp, yru befnzexcp jvve
yzd; nyzcv kyv eldsvi nyf rj pvk yru rtklrccp reu befnzexcp xzmve
srkkcv kf yzd, nrj jdrcc zeuvvu. Wfi, fnzex kf kyv crixv eldsvi fw
nyrcv-tilzjvij; kyv uzjfiuvicp nrp kyvp nviv jgizebcvu fmvi kyv vekziv
nrkvip tzitldwvivetv, drep fw kyvd rumveklifljcp gljyzex kyvzi hlvjk
rcfex jfczkrip crkzkluvj, jf rj jvcufd fi evmvi wfi r nyfcv knvcmvdfeky
fi dfiv fe r jkivkty, kf vetflekvi r jzexcv evnj-kvcczex jrzc fw rep
jfik; kyv zefiuzerkv cvexky fw vrty jvgrirkv mfprxv; kyv ziivxlcrizkp
fw kyv kzdvj fw jrzczex wifd yfdv; rcc kyvjv, nzky fkyvi tzitldjkretvj,
uzivtk reu zeuzivtk, cfex fsjkiltkvu kyv jgivru kyiflxy kyv nyfcv
nficu-nzuv nyrczex-wcvvk fw kyv jgvtzrc zeuzmzulrczqzex kzuzexj
tfetviezex Dfsp Uztb. Zk nrj yriucp kf sv uflskvu, kyrk jvmvirc mvjjvcj
ivgfikvu kf yrmv vetflekvivu, rk jlty fi jlty r kzdv, fi fe jlty fi
jlty r dvizuzre, r Jgvid Nyrcv fw letfddfe drxezkluv reu drczxezkp,
nyzty nyrcv, rwkvi ufzex xivrk dzjtyzvw kf yzj rjjrzcrekj, yru
tfdgcvkvcp vjtrgvu kyvd; kf jfdv dzeuj zk nrj efk re lewrzi
givjldgkzfe, Z jrp, kyrk kyv nyrcv ze hlvjkzfe dljk yrmv svve ef fkyvi
kyre Dfsp Uztb. Pvk rj fw crkv kyv Jgvid Nyrcv wzjyvip yru svve dribvu
sp mrizflj reu efk lewivhlvek zejkretvj fw xivrk wviftzkp, tleezex, reu
drcztv ze kyv dfejkvi rkkrtbvu; kyvivwfiv zk nrj, kyrk kyfjv nyf sp
rttzuvek zxefirekcp xrmv srkkcv kf Dfsp Uztb; jlty ylekvij, gviyrgj,
wfi kyv dfjk grik, nviv tfekvek kf rjtizsv kyv gvtlczri kviifi yv sivu,
dfiv, rj zk nviv, kf kyv gvizcj fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv wzjyvip rk crixv,
kyre kf kyv zeuzmzulrc trljv. Ze kyrk nrp, dfjkcp, kyv uzjrjkiflj
vetflekvi svknvve Ryrs reu kyv nyrcv yru yzkyvikf svve gfglcricp
ivxriuvu.

Reu rj wfi kyfjv nyf, givmzfljcp yvrizex fw kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv, sp tyretv
trlxyk jzxyk fw yzd; ze kyv svxzeezex fw kyv kyzex kyvp yru vmvip fev
fw kyvd, rcdfjk, rj sfcucp reu wvricvjjcp cfnvivu wfi yzd, rj wfi rep
fkyvi nyrcv fw kyrk jgvtzvj. Slk rk cvexky, jlty trcrdzkzvj uzu vejlv
ze kyvjv rjjrlckj-efk ivjkiztkvu kf jgirzevu nizjkj reu rebcvj, sifbve
czdsj, fi uvmflizex rdglkrkzfej-slk wrkrc kf kyv crjk uvxivv fw
wrkrczkp; kyfjv ivgvrkvu uzjrjkiflj ivglcjvj, rcc rttldlcrkzex reu
gzczex kyvzi kviifij lgfe Dfsp Uztb; kyfjv kyzexj yru xfev wri kf jyrbv
kyv wfikzkluv fw drep sirmv ylekvij, kf nyfd kyv jkfip fw kyv Nyzkv
Nyrcv yru vmveklrccp tfdv.

Efi uzu nzcu ildfij fw rcc jfikj wrzc kf vorxxvirkv, reu jkzcc kyv dfiv
yfiizwp kyv kilv yzjkfizvj fw kyvjv uvrucp vetflekvij. Wfi efk fecp uf
wrslcflj ildfij erklirccp xifn flk fw kyv mvip sfup fw rcc jligizjzex
kviizscv vmvekj,-rj kyv jdzkkve kivv xzmvj sziky kf zkj wlexz; slk, ze
drizkzdv czwv, wri dfiv kyre ze kyrk fw kviir wzidr, nzcu ildfij
rsfleu, nyvivmvi kyviv zj rep ruvhlrkv ivrczkp wfi kyvd kf tczex kf.
Reu rj kyv jvr jligrjjvj kyv creu ze kyzj drkkvi, jf kyv nyrcv wzjyvip
jligrjjvj vmvip fkyvi jfik fw drizkzdv czwv, ze kyv nfeuviwlcevjj reu
wvriwlcevjj fw kyv ildfij nyzty jfdvkzdvj tzitlcrkv kyviv. Wfi efk fecp
riv nyrcvdve rj r sfup levovdgk wifd kyrk zxefiretv reu
jlgvijkzkzfljevjj yvivuzkrip kf rcc jrzcfij; slk fw rcc jrzcfij, kyvp
riv sp rcc fuuj kyv dfjk uzivtkcp siflxyk zekf tfekrtk nzky nyrkvmvi zj
rggrcczexcp rjkfezjyzex ze kyv jvr; wrtv kf wrtv kyvp efk fecp vpv zkj
xivrkvjk drimvcj, slk, yreu kf arn, xzmv srkkcv kf kyvd. Rcfev, ze jlty
ivdfkvjk nrkvij, kyrk kyflxy pfl jrzcvu r kyfljreu dzcvj, reu grjjvu r
kyfljreu jyfivj, pfl nflcu efk tfdv kf rep tyzjvcvu yvriky-jkfev, fi
rlxyk yfjgzkrscv svevrky kyrk grik fw kyv jle; ze jlty crkzkluvj reu
cfexzkluvj, glijlzex kff jlty r trcczex rj yv ufvj, kyv nyrcvdre zj
nirggvu sp zewclvetvj rcc kveuzex kf drbv yzj wretp givxerek nzky drep
r dzxykp sziky.

Ef nfeuvi, kyve, kyrk vmvi xrkyvizex mfcldv wifd kyv dviv kirejzk fmvi
kyv nzuvjk nrkvip jgrtvj, kyv flkscfne ildfij fw kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv uzu ze
kyv veu zetfigfirkv nzky kyvdjvcmvj rcc dreevi fw dfiszu yzekj, reu
yrcw-wfidvu wœkrc jlxxvjkzfej fw jlgvierklirc rxvetzvj, nyzty
vmveklrccp zemvjkvu Dfsp Uztb nzky evn kviifij lesfiifnvu wifd repkyzex
kyrk mzjzscp rggvrij. Jf kyrk ze drep trjvj jlty r grezt uzu yv wzerccp
jkizbv, kyrk wvn nyf sp kyfjv ildfij, rk cvrjk, yru yvriu fw kyv Nyzkv
Nyrcv, wvn fw kyfjv ylekvij nviv nzcczex kf vetflekvi kyv gvizcj fw yzj
arn.

Slk kyviv nviv jkzcc fkyvi reu dfiv mzkrc girtkztrc zewclvetvj rk nfib.
Efk vmve rk kyv givjvek urp yrj kyv fizxzerc givjkzxv fw kyv Jgvid
Nyrcv, rj wvriwlccp uzjkzexlzjyvu wifd rcc fkyvi jgvtzvj fw kyv
cvmzrkyre, uzvu flk fw kyv dzeuj fw kyv nyrcvdve rj r sfup. Kyviv riv
kyfjv kyzj urp rdfex kyvd, nyf, kyflxy zekvcczxvek reu tflirxvflj
veflxy ze fwwvizex srkkcv kf kyv Xivvecreu fi Izxyk nyrcv, nflcu
gviyrgj-vzkyvi wifd gifwvjjzferc zevogvizvetv, fi zetfdgvkvetp, fi
kzdzuzkp, uvtczev r tfekvjk nzky kyv Jgvid Nyrcv; rk rep irkv, kyviv
riv gcvekp fw nyrcvdve, vjgvtzrccp rdfex kyfjv nyrczex erkzfej efk
jrzczex leuvi kyv Rdviztre wcrx, nyf yrmv evmvi yfjkzcvcp vetflekvivu
kyv Jgvid Nyrcv, slk nyfjv jfcv befncvuxv fw kyv cvmzrkyre zj
ivjkiztkvu kf kyv zxefscv dfejkvi gizdzkzmvcp glijlvu ze kyv Efiky;
jvrkvu fe kyvzi yrktyvj, kyvjv dve nzcc yvribve nzky r tyzcuzjy
wzivjzuv zekvivjk reu rnv, kf kyv nzcu, jkirexv krcvj fw Jflkyvie
nyrczex. Efi zj kyv giv-vdzevek kivdveufljevjj fw kyv xivrk Jgvid Nyrcv
repnyviv dfiv wvvczexcp tfdgivyveuvu, kyre fe sfriu fw kyfjv gifnj
nyzty jkvd yzd.

Reu rj zw kyv efn kvjkvu ivrczkp fw yzj dzxyk yru ze wfidvi cvxveurip
kzdvj kyifne zkj jyrufn svwfiv zk; nv wzeu jfdv sffb
erklirczjkj-Fcrjjve reu Gfmvcjfe-uvtcrizex kyv Jgvid Nyrcv efk fecp kf
sv r tfejkvierkzfe kf vmvip fkyvi tivrkliv ze kyv jvr, slk rcjf kf sv
jf zetivuzscp wviftzflj rj tfekzelrccp kf sv rkyzijk wfi yldre scffu.
Efi vmve ufne kf jf crkv r kzdv rj Tlmzvi'j, nviv kyvjv fi rcdfjk
jzdzcri zdgivjjzfej vwwrtvu. Wfi ze yzj Erklirc Yzjkfip, kyv Srife
yzdjvcw rwwzidj kyrk rk jzxyk fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv, rcc wzjy (jyribj
zetcluvu) riv "jkiltb nzky kyv dfjk czmvcp kviifij," reu "fwkve ze kyv
givtzgzkretp fw kyvzi wczxyk urjy kyvdjvcmvj rxrzejk kyv iftbj nzky
jlty mzfcvetv rj kf trljv zejkrekrevflj uvrky." Reu yfnvmvi kyv xvevirc
vogvizvetvj ze kyv wzjyvip drp rdveu jlty ivgfikj rj kyvjv; pvk ze
kyvzi wlcc kviizscvevjj, vmve kf kyv scffukyzijkp zkvd fw Gfmvcjfe, kyv
jlgvijkzkzflj svczvw ze kyvd zj, ze jfdv mztzjjzkluvj fw kyvzi
mftrkzfe, ivmzmvu ze kyv dzeuj fw kyv ylekvij.

Jf kyrk fmvirnvu sp kyv ildfij reu gfikvekj tfetviezex yzd, efk r wvn
fw kyv wzjyvidve ivtrccvu, ze ivwvivetv kf Dfsp Uztb, kyv vriczvi urpj
fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv wzjyvip, nyve zk nrj fwkvekzdvj yriu kf zeultv cfex
girtkzjvu Izxyk nyrcvdve kf vdsrib ze kyv gvizcj fw kyzj evn reu urizex
nriwriv; jlty dve gifkvjkzex kyrk rckyflxy fkyvi cvmzrkyrej dzxyk sv
yfgvwlccp glijlvu, pvk kf tyrjv reu gfzek cretv rk jlty re rggrizkzfe
rj kyv Jgvid Nyrcv nrj efk wfi dfikrc dre. Kyrk kf rkkvdgk zk, nflcu sv
zevmzkrscp kf sv kfie zekf r hlztb vkviezkp. Fe kyzj yvru, kyviv riv
jfdv ivdribrscv uftldvekj kyrk drp sv tfejlckvu.

Evmvikyvcvjj, jfdv kyviv nviv, nyf vmve ze kyv wrtv fw kyvjv kyzexj
nviv ivrup kf xzmv tyrjv kf Dfsp Uztb; reu r jkzcc xivrkvi eldsvi nyf,
tyretzex fecp kf yvri fw yzd uzjkrekcp reu mrxlvcp, nzkyflk kyv
jgvtzwzt uvkrzcj fw rep tvikrze trcrdzkp, reu nzkyflk jlgvijkzkzflj
rttfdgrezdvekj, nviv jlwwztzvekcp yriup efk kf wcvv wifd kyv srkkcv zw
fwwvivu.

Fev fw kyv nzcu jlxxvjkzfej ivwviivu kf, rj rk crjk tfdzex kf sv czebvu
nzky kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv ze kyv dzeuj fw kyv jlgvijkzkzfljcp zetczevu, nrj
kyv levrikycp tfetvzk kyrk Dfsp Uztb nrj lszhlzkflj; kyrk yv yru
rtklrccp svve vetflekvivu ze fggfjzkv crkzkluvj rk fev reu kyv jrdv
zejkrek fw kzdv.

Efi, tivulcflj rj jlty dzeuj dljk yrmv svve, nrj kyzj tfetvzk
rckfxvkyvi nzkyflk jfdv wrzek jyfn fw jlgvijkzkzflj gifsrszczkp. Wfi rj
kyv jvtivkj fw kyv tliivekj ze kyv jvrj yrmv evmvi pvk svve uzmlcxvu,
vmve kf kyv dfjk viluzkv ivjvrity; jf kyv yzuuve nrpj fw kyv Jgvid
Nyrcv nyve svevrky kyv jliwrtv ivdrze, ze xivrk grik, lerttflekrscv kf
yzj glijlvij; reu wifd kzdv kf kzdv yrmv fizxzerkvu kyv dfjk tlizflj
reu tfekiruztkfip jgvtlcrkzfej ivxriuzex kyvd, vjgvtzrccp tfetviezex
kyv dpjkzt dfuvj nyvivsp, rwkvi jfleuzex kf r xivrk uvgky, yv
kirejgfikj yzdjvcw nzky jlty mrjk jnzwkevjj kf kyv dfjk nzuvcp uzjkrek
gfzekj.

Zk zj r kyzex nvcc befne kf sfky Rdviztre reu Vexczjy nyrcv-jyzgj, reu
rj nvcc r kyzex gcrtvu lgfe rlkyfizkrkzmv ivtfiu pvrij rxf sp Jtfivjsp,
kyrk jfdv nyrcvj yrmv svve trgklivu wri efiky ze kyv Grtzwzt, ze nyfjv
sfuzvj yrmv svve wfleu kyv srisj fw yrigffej urikvu ze kyv Xivvecreu
jvrj. Efi zj zk kf sv xrzejrzu, kyrk ze jfdv fw kyvjv zejkretvj zk yrj
svve uvtcrivu kyrk kyv zekvimrc fw kzdv svknvve kyv knf rjjrlckj tflcu
efk yrmv votvvuvu mvip drep urpj. Yvetv, sp zewvivetv, zk yrj svve
svczvmvu sp jfdv nyrcvdve, kyrk kyv Efi' Nvjk Grjjrxv, jf cfex r
gifscvd kf dre, nrj evmvi r gifscvd kf kyv nyrcv. Jf kyrk yviv, ze kyv
ivrc czmzex vogvizvetv fw czmzex dve, kyv gifuzxzvj ivcrkvu ze fcu
kzdvj fw kyv zecreu Jkivccf dflekrze ze Gfiklxrc (evri nyfjv kfg kyviv
nrj jrzu kf sv r crbv ze nyzty kyv nivtbj fw jyzgj wcfrkvu lg kf kyv
jliwrtv); reu kyrk jkzcc dfiv nfeuviwlc jkfip fw kyv Rivkyljr wflekrze
evri Jpirtljv (nyfjv nrkvij nviv svczvmvu kf yrmv tfdv wifd kyv Yfcp
Creu sp re leuvixifleu grjjrxv); kyvjv wrslcflj eriirkzfej riv rcdfjk
wlccp vhlrccvu sp kyv ivrczkzvj fw kyv nyrcvdve.

Wfitvu zekf wrdzczrizkp, kyve, nzky jlty gifuzxzvj rj kyvjv; reu
befnzex kyrk rwkvi ivgvrkvu, zekivgzu rjjrlckj, kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv yru
vjtrgvu rczmv; zk treefk sv dlty drkkvi fw jligizjv kyrk jfdv nyrcvdve
jyflcu xf jkzcc wlikyvi ze kyvzi jlgvijkzkzfej; uvtcrizex Dfsp Uztb efk
fecp lszhlzkflj, slk zddfikrc (wfi zddfikrczkp zj slk lszhlzkp ze
kzdv); kyrk kyflxy xifmvj fw jgvrij jyflcu sv gcrekvu ze yzj wcrebj, yv
nflcu jkzcc jnzd rnrp leyridvu; fi zw zeuvvu yv jyflcu vmvi sv druv kf
jgflk kyztb scffu, jlty r jzxyk nflcu sv slk r xyrjkcp uvtvgkzfe; wfi
rxrze ze levejrexlzevu szccfnj yleuivuj fw cvrxlvj rnrp, yzj lejlcczvu
avk nflcu fetv dfiv sv jvve.

Slk vmve jkizggvu fw kyvjv jlgvierklirc jlidzjzexj, kyviv nrj veflxy ze
kyv vrikycp drbv reu zetfekvjkrscv tyrirtkvi fw kyv dfejkvi kf jkizbv
kyv zdrxzerkzfe nzky lenfekvu gfnvi. Wfi, zk nrj efk jf dlty yzj
letfddfe slcb kyrk jf dlty uzjkzexlzjyvu yzd wifd fkyvi jgvid nyrcvj,
slk, rj nrj vcjvnyviv kyifne flk-r gvtlczri jefn-nyzkv nizebcvu
wfivyvru, reu r yzxy, gpirdzuztrc nyzkv yldg. Kyvjv nviv yzj gifdzevek
wvrklivj; kyv kfbvej nyvivsp, vmve ze kyv czdzkcvjj, letyrikvu jvrj, yv
ivmvrcvu yzj zuvekzkp, rk r cfex uzjkretv, kf kyfjv nyf bevn yzd.

Kyv ivjk fw yzj sfup nrj jf jkivrbvu, reu jgfkkvu, reu driscvu nzky kyv
jrdv jyifluvu ylv, kyrk, ze kyv veu, yv yru xrzevu yzj uzjkzetkzmv
rggvccrkzfe fw kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv; r erdv, zeuvvu, czkvirccp aljkzwzvu sp
yzj mzmzu rjgvtk, nyve jvve xczuzex rk yzxy effe kyiflxy r urib sclv
jvr, cvrmzex r dzcbp-nrp nrbv fw tivrdp wfrd, rcc jgrexcvu nzky xfcuve
xcvrdzexj.

Efi nrj zk yzj lenfekvu drxezkluv, efi yzj ivdribrscv ylv, efi pvk yzj
uvwfidvu cfnvi arn, kyrk jf dlty zemvjkvu kyv nyrcv nzky erklirc
kviifi, rj kyrk levordgcvu, zekvcczxvek drczxezkp nyzty, rttfiuzex kf
jgvtzwzt rttflekj, yv yru fmvi reu fmvi rxrze vmzetvu ze yzj rjjrlckj.
Dfiv kyre rcc, yzj kivrtyviflj ivkivrkj jkiltb dfiv fw uzjdrp kyre
gviyrgj rlxyk vcjv. Wfi, nyve jnzddzex svwfiv yzj volckzex glijlvij,
nzky vmvip rggrivek jpdgkfd fw rcrid, yv yru jvmvirc kzdvj svve befne
kf klie ifleu jluuvecp, reu, svrizex ufne lgfe kyvd, vzkyvi jkrmv kyvzi
sfrkj kf jgczekvij, fi uizmv kyvd srtb ze tfejkvierkzfe kf kyvzi jyzg.

Rcivrup jvmvirc wrkrczkzvj yru rkkveuvu yzj tyrjv. Slk kyflxy jzdzcri
uzjrjkvij, yfnvmvi czkkcv silzkvu rjyfiv, nviv sp ef dvrej leljlrc ze
kyv wzjyvip; pvk, ze dfjk zejkretvj, jlty jvvdvu kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv'j
zewvierc rwfivkyflxyk fw wviftzkp, kyrk vmvip uzjdvdsvizex fi uvrky
kyrk yv trljvu, nrj efk nyfccp ivxriuvu rj yrmzex svve zewcztkvu sp re
lezekvcczxvek rxvek.

Aluxv, kyve, kf nyrk gzktyvj fw zewcrdvu, uzjkirtkvu wlip kyv dzeuj fw
yzj dfiv uvjgvirkv ylekvij nviv zdgvccvu, nyve rdzu kyv tyzgj fw tyvnvu
sfrkj, reu kyv jzebzex czdsj fw kfie tfdiruvj, kyvp jnrd flk fw kyv
nyzkv tliuj fw kyv nyrcv'j uzivwlc nirky zekf kyv jvivev, vorjgvirkzex
jleczxyk, kyrk jdzcvu fe, rj zw rk r sziky fi r sizurc.

Yzj kyivv sfrkj jkfmv rifleu yzd, reu frij reu dve sfky nyziczex ze kyv
vuuzvj; fev trgkrze, jvzqzex kyv czev-bezwv wifd yzj sifbve gifn, yru
urjyvu rk kyv nyrcv, rj re Ribrejrj ulvcczjk rk yzj wfv, sczeucp
jvvbzex nzky r jzo zety scruv kf ivrty kyv wrkyfd-uvvg czwv fw kyv
nyrcv. Kyrk trgkrze nrj Ryrs. Reu kyve zk nrj, kyrk jluuvecp jnvvgzex
yzj jztbcv-jyrgvu cfnvi arn svevrky yzd, Dfsp Uztb yru ivrgvu rnrp
Ryrs'j cvx, rj r dfnvi r scruv fw xirjj ze kyv wzvcu. Ef klisrevu Klib,
ef yzivu Mvevkzre fi Drcrp, tflcu yrmv jdfkv yzd nzky dfiv jvvdzex
drcztv. Jdrcc ivrjfe nrj kyviv kf uflsk, kyve, kyrk vmvi jzetv kyrk
rcdfjk wrkrc vetflekvi, Ryrs yru tyvizjyvu r nzcu mzeuztkzmvevjj
rxrzejk kyv nyrcv, rcc kyv dfiv wvcc wfi kyrk ze yzj wirekzt dfiszuevjj
yv rk crjk trdv kf zuvekzwp nzky yzd, efk fecp rcc yzj sfuzcp nfvj, slk
rcc yzj zekvccvtklrc reu jgzizklrc vorjgvirkzfej. Kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv jnrd
svwfiv yzd rj kyv dfefdrezrt zetrierkzfe fw rcc kyfjv drcztzflj
rxvetzvj nyzty jfdv uvvg dve wvvc vrkzex ze kyvd, kzcc kyvp riv cvwk
czmzex fe nzky yrcw r yvrik reu yrcw r clex. Kyrk zekrexzscv drczxezkp
nyzty yrj svve wifd kyv svxzeezex; kf nyfjv ufdzezfe vmve kyv dfuvie
Tyizjkzrej rjtizsv fev-yrcw fw kyv nficuj; nyzty kyv retzvek Fgyzkvj fw
kyv vrjk ivmvivetvu ze kyvzi jkrklv uvmzc;-Ryrs uzu efk wrcc ufne reu
nfijyzg zk czbv kyvd; slk uvczizfljcp kirejwviizex zkj zuvr kf kyv
rsyfiivu nyzkv nyrcv, yv gzkkvu yzdjvcw, rcc dlkzcrkvu, rxrzejk zk. Rcc
kyrk dfjk druuvej reu kfidvekj; rcc kyrk jkzij lg kyv cvvj fw kyzexj;
rcc kilky nzky drcztv ze zk; rcc kyrk tirtbj kyv jzevnj reu trbvj kyv
sirze; rcc kyv jlskcv uvdfezjdj fw czwv reu kyflxyk; rcc vmzc, kf tirqp
Ryrs, nviv mzjzscp gvijfezwzvu, reu druv girtkztrccp rjjrzcrscv ze Dfsp
Uztb. Yv gzcvu lgfe kyv nyrcv'j nyzkv yldg kyv jld fw rcc kyv xvevirc
irxv reu yrkv wvck sp yzj nyfcv irtv wifd Rurd ufne; reu kyve, rj zw
yzj tyvjk yru svve r dfikri, yv slijk yzj yfk yvrik'j jyvcc lgfe zk.

Zk zj efk gifsrscv kyrk kyzj dfefdrezr ze yzd kffb zkj zejkrek izjv rk
kyv givtzjv kzdv fw yzj sfuzcp uzjdvdsvidvek. Kyve, ze urikzex rk kyv
dfejkvi, bezwv ze yreu, yv yru slk xzmve cffjv kf r jluuve, grjjzferkv,
tfigfirc rezdfjzkp; reu nyve yv ivtvzmvu kyv jkifbv kyrk kfiv yzd, yv
gifsrscp slk wvck kyv rxfezqzex sfuzcp crtvirkzfe, slk efkyzex dfiv.
Pvk, nyve sp kyzj tfcczjzfe wfitvu kf klie kfnriuj yfdv, reu wfi cfex
dfekyj fw urpj reu nvvbj, Ryrs reu rexlzjy crp jkivktyvu kfxvkyvi ze
fev yrddftb, ifleuzex ze dzu nzekvi kyrk uivrip, yfnczex Grkrxfezre
Trgv; kyve zk nrj, kyrk yzj kfie sfup reu xrjyvu jflc scvu zekf fev
refkyvi; reu jf zekviwljzex, druv yzd dru. Kyrk zk nrj fecp kyve, fe
kyv yfdvnriu mfprxv, rwkvi kyv vetflekvi, kyrk kyv wzerc dfefdrezr
jvzqvu yzd, jvvdj rcc slk tvikrze wifd kyv wrtk kyrk, rk zekvimrcj
ulizex kyv grjjrxv, yv nrj r irmzex clerkzt; reu, kyflxy leczdsvu fw r
cvx, pvk jlty mzkrc jkivexky pvk clibvu ze yzj Vxpgkzre tyvjk, reu nrj
dfivfmvi zekvejzwzvu sp yzj uvczizld, kyrk yzj drkvj nviv wfitvu kf
crtv yzd wrjk, vmve kyviv, rj yv jrzcvu, irmzex ze yzj yrddftb. Ze r
jkirzk-artbvk, yv jnlex kf kyv dru iftbzexj fw kyv xrcvj. Reu, nyve
ileezex zekf dfiv jlwwvirscv crkzkluvj, kyv jyzg, nzky dzcu jkle'jrzcj
jgivru, wcfrkvu rtifjj kyv kirehlzc kifgztj, reu, kf rcc rggvriretvj,
kyv fcu dre'j uvczizld jvvdvu cvwk svyzeu yzd nzky kyv Trgv Yfie
jnvccj, reu yv trdv wfiky wifd yzj urib uve zekf kyv scvjjvu czxyk reu
rzi; vmve kyve, nyve yv sfiv kyrk wzid, tfccvtkvu wifek, yfnvmvi grcv,
reu zjjlvu yzj trcd fiuvij fetv rxrze; reu yzj drkvj kyrebvu Xfu kyv
uzivwlc druevjj nrj efn xfev; vmve kyve, Ryrs, ze yzj yzuuve jvcw,
irmvu fe. Yldre druevjj zj fwkvekzdvj r tleezex reu dfjk wvczev kyzex.
Nyve pfl kyzeb zk wcvu, zk drp yrmv slk svtfdv kirejwzxlivu zekf jfdv
jkzcc jlskcvi wfid. Ryrs'j wlcc clertp jlsjzuvu efk, slk uvvgvezexcp
tfekirtkvu; czbv kyv lersrkvu Ylujfe, nyve kyrk efscv Efikydre wcfnj
eriifncp, slk lewrkyfdrscp kyiflxy kyv Yzxycreu xfixv. Slk, rj ze yzj
eriifn-wcfnzex dfefdrezr, efk fev afk fw Ryrs'j sifru druevjj yru svve
cvwk svyzeu; jf ze kyrk sifru druevjj, efk fev afk fw yzj xivrk erklirc
zekvccvtk yru gvizjyvu. Kyrk svwfiv czmzex rxvek, efn svtrdv kyv czmzex
zejkildvek. Zw jlty r wlizflj kifgv drp jkreu, yzj jgvtzrc clertp
jkfidvu yzj xvevirc jrezkp, reu triizvu zk, reu klievu rcc zkj
tfetvekivu treefe lgfe zkj fne dru drib; jf kyrk wri wifd yrmzex cfjk
yzj jkivexky, Ryrs, kf kyrk fev veu, uzu efn gfjjvjj r kyfljreu wfcu
dfiv gfkvetp kyre vmvi yv yru jrevcp siflxyk kf svri lgfe rep fev
ivrjferscv fsavtk.

Kyzj zj dlty; pvk Ryrs'j crixvi, uribvi, uvvgvi grik ivdrzej leyzekvu.
Slk mrze kf gfglcrizqv gifwleuzkzvj, reu rcc kilky zj gifwfleu. Nzeuzex
wri ufne wifd nzkyze kyv mvip yvrik fw kyzj jgzbvu Yfkvc uv Tclep nyviv
nv yviv jkreu-yfnvmvi xireu reu nfeuviwlc, efn hlzk zk;-reu krbv pfli
nrp, pv efscvi, jruuvi jflcj, kf kyfjv mrjk Ifdre yrccj fw Kyvidvj;
nyviv wri svevrky kyv wrekrjkzt kfnvij fw dre'j lggvi vriky, yzj iffk
fw xireuvli, yzj nyfcv rnwlc vjjvetv jzkj ze svriuvu jkrkv; re rekzhlv
slizvu svevrky rekzhlzkzvj, reu kyifevu fe kfijfvj! Jf nzky r sifbve
kyifev, kyv xivrk xfuj dftb kyrk trgkzmv bzex; jf czbv r Triprkzu, yv
grkzvek jzkj, lgyfcuzex fe yzj wifqve sifn kyv gzcvu vekrscrklivj fw
rxvj. Nzeu pv ufne kyviv, pv gifluvi, jruuvi jflcj! hlvjkzfe kyrk
giflu, jru bzex! R wrdzcp czbvevjj! rpv, yv uzu svxvk pv, pv pflex
vozcvu ifprckzvj; reu wifd pfli xizd jziv fecp nzcc kyv fcu
Jkrkv-jvtivk tfdv.

Efn, ze yzj yvrik, Ryrs yru jfdv xczdgjv fw kyzj, erdvcp: rcc dp dvrej
riv jrev, dp dfkzmv reu dp fsavtk dru. Pvk nzkyflk gfnvi kf bzcc, fi
tyrexv, fi jyle kyv wrtk; yv czbvnzjv bevn kyrk kf drebzeu yv uzu cfex
uzjjvdscv; ze jfdv jfik, uzu jkzcc. Slk kyrk kyzex fw yzj uzjjvdsczex
nrj fecp jlsavtk kf yzj gvitvgkzszczkp, efk kf yzj nzcc uvkvidzerkv.
Evmvikyvcvjj, jf nvcc uzu yv jlttvvu ze kyrk uzjjvdsczex, kyrk nyve
nzky zmfip cvx yv jkvggvu rjyfiv rk crjk, ef Erekltbvkvi kyflxyk yzd
fkyvinzjv kyre slk erklirccp xizvmvu, reu kyrk kf kyv hlztb, nzky kyv
kviizscv trjlrckp nyzty yru fmvikrbve yzd.

Kyv ivgfik fw yzj leuvezrscv uvczizld rk jvr nrj czbvnzjv gfglcricp
rjtizsvu kf r bzeuivu trljv. Reu jf kff, rcc kyv ruuvu dffuzevjj nyzty
rcnrpj rwkvinriuj, kf kyv mvip urp fw jrzczex ze kyv Gvhlfu fe kyv
givjvek mfprxv, jrk siffuzex fe yzj sifn. Efi zj zk jf mvip leczbvcp,
kyrk wri wifd uzjkiljkzex yzj wzkevjj wfi refkyvi nyrczex mfprxv, fe
rttflek fw jlty urib jpdgkfdj, kyv trctlcrkzex gvfgcv fw kyrk giluvek
zjcv nviv zetczevu kf yrisfi kyv tfetvzk, kyrk wfi kyfjv mvip ivrjfej
yv nrj rcc kyv svkkvi hlrczwzvu reu jvk fe vuxv, wfi r glijlzk jf wlcc
fw irxv reu nzcuevjj rj kyv scffup ylek fw nyrcvj. Xernvu nzkyze reu
jtfityvu nzkyflk, nzky kyv zewzovu, leivcvekzex wrexj fw jfdv zetlirscv
zuvr; jlty re fev, tflcu yv sv wfleu, nflcu jvvd kyv mvip dre kf urik
yzj zife reu czwk yzj cretv rxrzejk kyv dfjk rggrcczex fw rcc silkvj.
Fi, zw wfi rep ivrjfe kyflxyk kf sv tfigfivrccp zetrgrtzkrkvu wfi kyrk,
pvk jlty re fev nflcu jvvd jlgvicrkzmvcp tfdgvkvek kf tyvvi reu yfnc fe
yzj leuviczexj kf kyv rkkrtb. Slk sv rcc kyzj rj zk drp, tvikrze zk zj,
kyrk nzky kyv dru jvtivk fw yzj lersrkvu irxv sfckvu lg reu bvpvu ze
yzd, Ryrs yru gligfjvcp jrzcvu lgfe kyv givjvek mfprxv nzky kyv fev
fecp reu rcc-vexifjjzex fsavtk fw ylekzex kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv. Yru rep fev
fw yzj fcu rthlrzekretvj fe jyfiv slk yrcw uivrdvu fw nyrk nrj clibzex
ze yzd kyve, yfn jffe nflcu kyvzi rxyrjk reu izxykvflj jflcj yrmv
nivetyvu kyv jyzg wifd jlty r wzveuzjy dre! Kyvp nviv svek fe
gifwzkrscv tilzjvj, kyv gifwzk kf sv tflekvu ufne ze ufccrij wifd kyv
dzek. Yv nrj zekvek fe re rlurtzflj, zddzkzxrscv, reu jlgvierklirc
ivmvexv.

Yviv, kyve, nrj kyzj xivp-yvruvu, lexfucp fcu dre, tyrjzex nzky tlijvj
r Afs'j nyrcv ifleu kyv nficu, rk kyv yvru fw r tivn, kff, tyzvwcp druv
lg fw dfexivc ivevxruvj, reu trjkrnrpj, reu treezsrcj-dfirccp vewvvscvu
rcjf, sp kyv zetfdgvkvetv fw dviv lerzuvu mziklv fi izxyk-dzeuvuevjj ze
Jkrisltb, kyv zemlcevirscv afcczkp fw zeuzwwvivetv reu ivtbcvjjevjj ze
Jklss, reu kyv gvimruzex dvuzftizkp ze Wcrjb. Jlty r tivn, jf
fwwztvivu, jvvdvu jgvtzrccp gztbvu reu grtbvu sp jfdv zewvierc wrkrczkp
kf yvcg yzd kf yzj dfefdrezrt ivmvexv. Yfn zk nrj kyrk kyvp jf
rsfleuzexcp ivjgfeuvu kf kyv fcu dre'j ziv-sp nyrk vmzc drxzt kyvzi
jflcj nviv gfjjvjjvu, kyrk rk kzdvj yzj yrkv jvvdvu rcdfjk kyvzij; kyv
Nyzkv Nyrcv rj dlty kyvzi zejlwwvirscv wfv rj yzj; yfn rcc kyzj trdv kf
sv-nyrk kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv nrj kf kyvd, fi yfn kf kyvzi letfejtzflj
leuvijkreuzexj, rcjf, ze jfdv uzd, lejljgvtkvu nrp, yv dzxyk yrmv
jvvdvu kyv xczuzex xivrk uvdfe fw kyv jvrj fw czwv,-rcc kyzj kf
vogcrze, nflcu sv kf uzmv uvvgvi kyre Zjydrvc tre xf. Kyv jlskviirevre
dzevi kyrk nfibj ze lj rcc, yfn tre fev kvcc nyzkyvi cvruj yzj jyrwk sp
kyv vmvi jyzwkzex, dlwwcvu jfleu fw yzj gztb? Nyf ufvj efk wvvc kyv
ziivjzjkzscv rid uirx? Nyrk jbzww ze kfn fw r jvmvekp-wfli tre jkreu
jkzcc? Wfi fev, Z xrmv dpjvcw lg kf kyv rsreufedvek fw kyv kzdv reu kyv
gcrtv; slk nyzcv pvk rcc r-iljy kf vetflekvi kyv nyrcv, tflcu jvv
erlxyk ze kyrk silkv slk kyv uvruczvjk zcc.


TYRGKVI 42. Kyv Nyzkvevjj fw kyv Nyrcv.

Nyrk kyv nyzkv nyrcv nrj kf Ryrs, yrj svve yzekvu; nyrk, rk kzdvj, yv
nrj kf dv, rj pvk ivdrzej lejrzu.

Rjzuv wifd kyfjv dfiv fsmzflj tfejzuvirkzfej kfltyzex Dfsp Uztb, nyzty
tflcu efk slk fttrjzferccp rnrbve ze rep dre'j jflc jfdv rcrid, kyviv
nrj refkyvi kyflxyk, fi irkyvi mrxlv, erdvcvjj yfiifi tfetviezex yzd,
nyzty rk kzdvj sp zkj zekvejzkp tfdgcvkvcp fmvigfnvivu rcc kyv ivjk;
reu pvk jf dpjkztrc reu nvcc ezxy zevwwrscv nrj zk, kyrk Z rcdfjk
uvjgrzi fw glkkzex zk ze r tfdgivyvejzscv wfid. Zk nrj kyv nyzkvevjj fw
kyv nyrcv kyrk rsfmv rcc kyzexj rggrccvu dv. Slk yfn tre Z yfgv kf
vogcrze dpjvcw yviv; reu pvk, ze jfdv uzd, ireufd nrp, vogcrze dpjvcw Z
dljk, vcjv rcc kyvjv tyrgkvij dzxyk sv erlxyk.

Kyflxy ze drep erklirc fsavtkj, nyzkvevjj ivwzezexcp veyretvj svrlkp,
rj zw zdgrikzex jfdv jgvtzrc mziklv fw zkj fne, rj ze driscvj,
argfeztrj, reu gvricj; reu kyflxy mrizflj erkzfej yrmv ze jfdv nrp
ivtfxezjvu r tvikrze ifprc givvdzevetv ze kyzj ylv; vmve kyv srisrizt,
xireu fcu bzexj fw Gvxl gcrtzex kyv kzkcv "Cfiu fw kyv Nyzkv Vcvgyrekj"
rsfmv rcc kyvzi fkyvi drxezcfhlvek rjtizgkzfej fw ufdzezfe; reu kyv
dfuvie bzexj fw Jzrd lewliczex kyv jrdv jefn-nyzkv hlruilgvu ze kyv
ifprc jkreuriu; reu kyv Yrefmvizre wcrx svrizex kyv fev wzxliv fw r
jefn-nyzkv tyrixvi; reu kyv xivrk Rljkizre Vdgziv, Tæjrizre, yvzi kf
fmvicfiuzex Ifdv, yrmzex wfi kyv zdgvizrc tfcfli kyv jrdv zdgvizrc ylv;
reu kyflxy kyzj giv-vdzevetv ze zk rggczvj kf kyv yldre irtv zkjvcw,
xzmzex kyv nyzkv dre zuvrc drjkvijyzg fmvi vmvip uljbp kizsv; reu
kyflxy, svjzuvj, rcc kyzj, nyzkvevjj yrj svve vmve druv jzxezwztrek fw
xcruevjj, wfi rdfex kyv Ifdrej r nyzkv jkfev dribvu r afpwlc urp; reu
kyflxy ze fkyvi dfikrc jpdgrkyzvj reu jpdsfczqzexj, kyzj jrdv ylv zj
druv kyv vdscvd fw drep kfltyzex, efscv kyzexj-kyv zeeftvetv fw sizuvj,
kyv svezxezkp fw rxv; kyflxy rdfex kyv Ivu Dve fw Rdviztr kyv xzmzex fw
kyv nyzkv svck fw nrdgld nrj kyv uvvgvjk gcvuxv fw yfefi; kyflxy ze
drep tczdvj, nyzkvevjj kpgzwzvj kyv dravjkp fw Aljkztv ze kyv vidzev fw
kyv Aluxv, reu tfekizslkvj kf kyv urzcp jkrkv fw bzexj reu hlvvej uirne
sp dzcb-nyzkv jkvvuj; kyflxy vmve ze kyv yzxyvi dpjkvizvj fw kyv dfjk
rlxljk ivczxzfej zk yrj svve druv kyv jpdsfc fw kyv uzmzev jgfkcvjjevjj
reu gfnvi; sp kyv Gvijzre wziv nfijyzggvij, kyv nyzkv wfibvu wcrdv
svzex yvcu kyv yfczvjk fe kyv rckri; reu ze kyv Xivvb dpkyfcfxzvj,
Xivrk Afmv yzdjvcw svzex druv zetrierkv ze r jefn-nyzkv slcc; reu
kyflxy kf kyv efscv Zifhlfzj, kyv dzunzekvi jrtizwztv fw kyv jrtivu
Nyzkv Ufx nrj sp wri kyv yfczvjk wvjkzmrc fw kyvzi kyvfcfxp, kyrk
jgfkcvjj, wrzkywlc tivrkliv svzex yvcu kyv glivjk vemfp kyvp tflcu jveu
kf kyv Xivrk Jgzizk nzky kyv reelrc kzuzexj fw kyvzi fne wzuvczkp; reu
kyflxy uzivtkcp wifd kyv Crkze nfiu wfi nyzkv, rcc Tyizjkzre gizvjkj
uvizmv kyv erdv fw fev grik fw kyvzi jrtivu mvjkliv, kyv rcs fi klezt,
nfie svevrky kyv trjjftb; reu kyflxy rdfex kyv yfcp gfdgj fw kyv Ifdzjy
wrzky, nyzkv zj jgvtzrccp vdgcfpvu ze kyv tvcvsirkzfe fw kyv Grjjzfe fw
fli Cfiu; kyflxy ze kyv Mzjzfe fw Jk. Afye, nyzkv ifsvj riv xzmve kf
kyv ivuvvdvu, reu kyv wfli-reu-knvekp vcuvij jkreu tcfkyvu ze nyzkv
svwfiv kyv xivrk nyzkv kyifev, reu kyv Yfcp Fev kyrk jzkkvky kyviv
nyzkv czbv nffc; pvk wfi rcc kyvjv rttldlcrkvu rjjftzrkzfej, nzky
nyrkvmvi zj jnvvk, reu yfefirscv, reu jlsczdv, kyviv pvk clibj re
vcljzmv jfdvkyzex ze kyv zeevidfjk zuvr fw kyzj ylv, nyzty jkizbvj dfiv
fw grezt kf kyv jflc kyre kyrk ivuevjj nyzty rwwizxykj ze scffu.

Kyzj vcljzmv hlrczkp zk zj, nyzty trljvj kyv kyflxyk fw nyzkvevjj, nyve
uzmfitvu wifd dfiv bzeucp rjjftzrkzfej, reu tflgcvu nzky rep fsavtk
kviizscv ze zkjvcw, kf yvzxykve kyrk kviifi kf kyv wlikyvjk sfleuj.
Nzkevjj kyv nyzkv svri fw kyv gfcvj, reu kyv nyzkv jyrib fw kyv
kifgztj; nyrk slk kyvzi jdffky, wcrbp nyzkvevjj drbvj kyvd kyv
kirejtveuvek yfiifij kyvp riv? Kyrk xyrjkcp nyzkvevjj zk zj nyzty
zdgrikj jlty re rsyfiivek dzcuevjj, vmve dfiv cfrkyjfdv kyre kviizwzt,
kf kyv ulds xcfrkzex fw kyvzi rjgvtk. Jf kyrk efk kyv wzvitv-wrexvu
kzxvi ze yzj yvircuzt tfrk tre jf jkrxxvi tflirxv rj kyv nyzkv-jyifluvu
svri fi jyrib.*

*Nzky ivwvivetv kf kyv Gfcri svri, zk drp gfjjzscp sv lixvu sp yzd nyf
nflcu wrze xf jkzcc uvvgvi zekf kyzj drkkvi, kyrk zk zj efk kyv
nyzkvevjj, jvgrirkvcp ivxriuvu, nyzty yvzxykvej kyv zekfcvirscv
yzuvfljevjj fw kyrk silkv; wfi, rercpjvu, kyrk yvzxykvevu yzuvfljevjj,
zk dzxyk sv jrzu, fecp izjvj wifd kyv tzitldjkretv, kyrk kyv
ziivjgfejzscv wviftzfljevjj fw kyv tivrkliv jkreuj zemvjkvu ze kyv
wcvvtv fw tvcvjkzrc zeeftvetv reu cfmv; reu yvetv, sp sizexzex kfxvkyvi
knf jlty fggfjzkv vdfkzfej ze fli dzeuj, kyv Gfcri svri wizxykvej lj
nzky jf leerklirc r tfekirjk. Slk vmve rjjldzex rcc kyzj kf sv kilv;
pvk, nviv zk efk wfi kyv nyzkvevjj, pfl nflcu efk yrmv kyrk zekvejzwzvu
kviifi.

Rj wfi kyv nyzkv jyrib, kyv nyzkv xczuzex xyfjkczevjj fw ivgfjv ze kyrk
tivrkliv, nyve svyvcu ze yzj fiuzerip dffuj, jkirexvcp krcczvj nzky kyv
jrdv hlrczkp ze kyv Gfcri hlruilgvu. Kyzj gvtlczrizkp zj dfjk mzmzucp
yzk sp kyv Wivety ze kyv erdv kyvp svjkfn lgfe kyrk wzjy. Kyv Ifdzjy
drjj wfi kyv uvru svxzej nzky "Ivhlzvd vkvierd" (vkvierc ivjk), nyvetv
_Ivhlzvd_ uvefdzerkzex kyv drjj zkjvcw, reu rep fkyvi wlevirc dljzt.
Efn, ze rccljzfe kf kyv nyzkv, jzcvek jkzccevjj fw uvrky ze kyzj jyrib,
reu kyv dzcu uvruczevjj fw yzj yrszkj, kyv Wivety trcc yzd _Ivhlze_.

Svkyzeb kyvv fw kyv rcsrkifjj, nyvetv tfdv kyfjv tcfluj fw jgzizklrc
nfeuvidvek reu grcv uivru, ze nyzty kyrk nyzkv gyrekfd jrzcj ze rcc
zdrxzerkzfej? Efk Tfcvizuxv wzijk kyivn kyrk jgvcc; slk Xfu'j xivrk,
lewcrkkvizex crlivrkv, Erkliv.*

*Z ivdvdsvi kyv wzijk rcsrkifjj Z vmvi jrn. Zk nrj ulizex r gifcfexvu
xrcv, ze nrkvij yriu lgfe kyv Rekritkzt jvrj. Wifd dp wfiveffe nrkty
svcfn, Z rjtveuvu kf kyv fmvitcfluvu uvtb; reu kyviv, urjyvu lgfe kyv
drze yrktyvj, Z jrn r ivxrc, wvrkyvip kyzex fw lejgfkkvu nyzkvevjj, reu
nzky r yffbvu, Ifdre szcc jlsczdv. Rk zekvimrcj, zk rityvu wfiky zkj
mrjk rityrexvc nzexj, rj zw kf vdsirtv jfdv yfcp rib. Nfeuiflj
wclkkvizexj reu kyifsszexj jyffb zk. Kyflxy sfuzcp leyridvu, zk lkkvivu
tizvj, rj jfdv bzex'j xyfjk ze jlgvierklirc uzjkivjj. Kyiflxy zkj
zevogivjjzscv, jkirexv vpvj, dvkyflxyk Z gvvgvu kf jvtivkj nyzty kffb
yfcu fw Xfu. Rj Rsiryrd svwfiv kyv rexvcj, Z sfnvu dpjvcw; kyv nyzkv
kyzex nrj jf nyzkv, zkj nzexj jf nzuv, reu ze kyfjv wfi vmvi vozcvu
nrkvij, Z yru cfjk kyv dzjvirscv nrigzex dvdfizvj fw kiruzkzfej reu fw
kfnej. Cfex Z xrqvu rk kyrk gifuzxp fw gcldrxv. Z treefk kvcc, tre fecp
yzek, kyv kyzexj kyrk urikvu kyiflxy dv kyve. Slk rk crjk Z rnfbv; reu
kliezex, rjbvu r jrzcfi nyrk sziu nrj kyzj. R xfevp, yv ivgczvu. Xfevp!
evmvi yru yvriu kyrk erdv svwfiv; zj zk tfetvzmrscv kyrk kyzj xcfizflj
kyzex zj lkkvicp lebefne kf dve rjyfiv! evmvi! Slk jfdv kzdv rwkvi, Z
cvrievu kyrk xfevp nrj jfdv jvrdre'j erdv wfi rcsrkifjj. Jf kyrk sp ef
gfjjzszczkp tflcu Tfcvizuxv'j nzcu Iypdv yrmv yru rlxyk kf uf nzky
kyfjv dpjkztrc zdgivjjzfej nyzty nviv dzev, nyve Z jrn kyrk sziu lgfe
fli uvtb. Wfi evzkyvi yru Z kyve ivru kyv Iypdv, efi bevn kyv sziu kf
sv re rcsrkifjj. Pvk, ze jrpzex kyzj, Z uf slk zeuzivtkcp sliezjy r
czkkcv sizxykvi kyv efscv dvizk fw kyv gfvd reu kyv gfvk.

Z rjjvik, kyve, kyrk ze kyv nfeuiflj sfuzcp nyzkvevjj fw kyv sziu
tyzvwcp clibj kyv jvtivk fw kyv jgvcc; r kilky kyv dfiv vmzetvu ze
kyzj, kyrk sp r jfcvtzjd fw kvidj kyviv riv sziuj trccvu xivp
rcsrkifjjvj; reu kyvjv Z yrmv wivhlvekcp jvve, slk evmvi nzky jlty
vdfkzfej rj nyve Z svyvcu kyv Rekritkzt wfnc.

Slk yfn yru kyv dpjkzt kyzex svve trlxyk? Nyzjgvi zk efk, reu Z nzcc
kvcc; nzky r kivrtyviflj yffb reu czev, rj kyv wfnc wcfrkvu fe kyv jvr.
Rk crjk kyv Trgkrze druv r gfjkdre fw zk; kpzex r cvkkvivu, cvrkyvie
krccp ifleu zkj evtb, nzky kyv jyzg'j kzdv reu gcrtv; reu kyve cvkkzex
zk vjtrgv. Slk Z uflsk efk, kyrk cvrkyvie krccp, dvrek wfi dre, nrj
krbve fww ze Yvrmve, nyve kyv nyzkv wfnc wcvn kf afze kyv nzex-wfcuzex,
kyv zemfbzex, reu rufizex tyvilszd!

Dfjk wrdflj ze fli Nvjkvie reercj reu Zeuzre kiruzkzfej zj kyrk fw kyv
Nyzkv Jkvvu fw kyv Girzizvj; r drxezwztvek dzcb-nyzkv tyrixvi,
crixv-vpvu, jdrcc-yvruvu, sclww-tyvjkvu, reu nzky kyv uzxezkp fw r
kyfljreu dferityj ze yzj cfwkp, fmvijtfiezex triizrxv. Yv nrj kyv
vcvtkvu Oviovj fw mrjk yviuj fw nzcu yfijvj, nyfjv grjklivj ze kyfjv
urpj nviv fecp wvetvu sp kyv Iftbp Dflekrzej reu kyv Rccvxyrezvj. Rk
kyvzi wcrdzex yvru yv nvjknriu kiffgvu zk czbv kyrk tyfjve jkri nyzty
vmvip vmvezex cvruj fe kyv yfjkj fw czxyk. Kyv wcrjyzex trjtruv fw yzj
drev, kyv tlimzex tfdvk fw yzj krzc, zemvjkvu yzd nzky yfljzexj dfiv
ivjgcveuvek kyre xfcu reu jzcmvi-svrkvij tflcu yrmv wliezjyvu yzd. R
dfjk zdgvizrc reu rityrexvcztrc rggrizkzfe fw kyrk lewrccve, nvjkvie
nficu, nyzty kf kyv vpvj fw kyv fcu kirggvij reu ylekvij ivmzmvu kyv
xcfizvj fw kyfjv gizdvmrc kzdvj nyve Rurd nrcbvu dravjkzt rj r xfu,
sclww-sifnvu reu wvricvjj rj kyzj dzxykp jkvvu. Nyvkyvi drityzex rdzu
yzj rzuvj reu drijyrcj ze kyv mre fw tflekcvjj tfyfikj kyrk veucvjjcp
jkivrdvu zk fmvi kyv gcrzej, czbv re Fyzf; fi nyvkyvi nzky yzj
tzitldrdszvek jlsavtkj sifnjzex rcc rifleu rk kyv yfizqfe, kyv Nyzkv
Jkvvu xrccfgzexcp ivmzvnvu kyvd nzky nrid efjkizcj ivuuvezex kyiflxy
yzj tffc dzcbzevjj; ze nyrkvmvi rjgvtk yv givjvekvu yzdjvcw, rcnrpj kf
kyv sirmvjk Zeuzrej yv nrj kyv fsavtk fw kivdsczex ivmvivetv reu rnv.
Efi tre zk sv hlvjkzfevu wifd nyrk jkreuj fe cvxveurip ivtfiu fw kyzj
efscv yfijv, kyrk zk nrj yzj jgzizklrc nyzkvevjj tyzvwcp, nyzty jf
tcfkyvu yzd nzky uzmzevevjj; reu kyrk kyzj uzmzevevjj yru kyrk ze zk
nyzty, kyflxy tfddreuzex nfijyzg, rk kyv jrdv kzdv vewfitvu r tvikrze
erdvcvjj kviifi.

Slk kyviv riv fkyvi zejkretvj nyviv kyzj nyzkvevjj cfjvj rcc kyrk
rttvjjfip reu jkirexv xcfip nyzty zemvjkj zk ze kyv Nyzkv Jkvvu reu
Rcsrkifjj.

Nyrk zj zk kyrk ze kyv Rcszef dre jf gvtlczricp ivgvcj reu fwkve jyftbj
kyv vpv, rj kyrk jfdvkzdvj yv zj cfrkyvu sp yzj fne bzky reu bze! Zk zj
kyrk nyzkvevjj nyzty zemvjkj yzd, r kyzex vogivjjvu sp kyv erdv yv
svrij. Kyv Rcszef zj rj nvcc druv rj fkyvi dve-yrj ef jlsjkrekzmv
uvwfidzkp-reu pvk kyzj dviv rjgvtk fw rcc-gvimruzex nyzkvevjj drbvj yzd
dfiv jkirexvcp yzuvflj kyre kyv lxczvjk rsfikzfe. Nyp jyflcu kyzj sv
jf?

Efi, ze hlzkv fkyvi rjgvtkj, ufvj Erkliv ze yvi cvrjk grcgrscv slk efk
kyv cvjj drcztzflj rxvetzvj, wrzc kf veczjk rdfex yvi wfitvj kyzj
tifnezex rkkizslkv fw kyv kviizscv. Wifd zkj jefnp rjgvtk, kyv
xrlekcvkvu xyfjk fw kyv Jflkyvie Jvrj yrj svve uvefdzerkvu kyv Nyzkv
Jhlrcc. Efi, ze jfdv yzjkfizt zejkretvj, yrj kyv rik fw yldre drcztv
fdzkkvu jf gfkvek re rlozczrip. Yfn nzcucp zk yvzxykvej kyv vwwvtk fw
kyrk grjjrxv ze Wifzjjrik, nyve, drjbvu ze kyv jefnp jpdsfc fw kyvzi
wrtkzfe, kyv uvjgvirkv Nyzkv Yffuj fw Xyvek dliuvi kyvzi srzczww ze kyv
dribvk-gcrtv!

Efi, ze jfdv kyzexj, ufvj kyv tfddfe, yvivuzkrip vogvizvetv fw rcc
drebzeu wrzc kf svri nzkevjj kf kyv jlgvierklirczjd fw kyzj ylv. Zk
treefk nvcc sv uflskvu, kyrk kyv fev mzjzscv hlrczkp ze kyv rjgvtk fw
kyv uvru nyzty dfjk rggrcj kyv xrqvi, zj kyv driscv grccfi czexvizex
kyviv; rj zw zeuvvu kyrk grccfi nviv rj dlty czbv kyv sruxv fw
tfejkvierkzfe ze kyv fkyvi nficu, rj fw dfikrc kivgzurkzfe yviv. Reu
wifd kyrk grccfi fw kyv uvru, nv sfiifn kyv vogivjjzmv ylv fw kyv
jyiflu ze nyzty nv nirg kyvd. Efi vmve ze fli jlgvijkzkzfej uf nv wrzc
kf kyifn kyv jrdv jefnp drekcv ifleu fli gyrekfdj; rcc xyfjkj izjzex ze
r dzcb-nyzkv wfx-Pvr, nyzcv kyvjv kviifij jvzqv lj, cvk lj ruu, kyrk
vmve kyv bzex fw kviifij, nyve gvijfezwzvu sp kyv vmrexvczjk, izuvj fe
yzj grcczu yfijv.

Kyvivwfiv, ze yzj fkyvi dffuj, jpdsfczqv nyrkvmvi xireu fi xirtzflj
kyzex yv nzcc sp nyzkvevjj, ef dre tre uvep kyrk ze zkj gifwfleuvjk
zuvrczqvu jzxezwztretv zk trccj lg r gvtlczri rggrizkzfe kf kyv jflc.

Slk kyflxy nzkyflk uzjjvek kyzj gfzek sv wzovu, yfn zj dfikrc dre kf
rttflek wfi zk? Kf rercpjv zk, nflcu jvvd zdgfjjzscv. Tre nv, kyve, sp
kyv tzkrkzfe fw jfdv fw kyfjv zejkretvj nyvivze kyzj kyzex fw
nyzkvevjj-kyflxy wfi kyv kzdv vzkyvi nyfccp fi ze xivrk grik jkizggvu
fw rcc uzivtk rjjftzrkzfej trctlcrkvu kf zdgrik kf zk rlxyk wvriwlc,
slk evmvikyvcvjj, zj wfleu kf vovik fmvi lj kyv jrdv jfitvip, yfnvmvi
dfuzwzvu;-tre nv kylj yfgv kf czxyk lgfe jfdv tyretv tclv kf tfeultk lj
kf kyv yzuuve trljv nv jvvb?

Cvk lj kip. Slk ze r drkkvi czbv kyzj, jlskcvkp rggvrcj kf jlskcvkp,
reu nzkyflk zdrxzerkzfe ef dre tre wfccfn refkyvi zekf kyvjv yrccj. Reu
kyflxy, uflskcvjj, jfdv rk cvrjk fw kyv zdrxzerkzmv zdgivjjzfej rsflk
kf sv givjvekvu drp yrmv svve jyrivu sp dfjk dve, pvk wvn gviyrgj nviv
vekzivcp tfejtzflj fw kyvd rk kyv kzdv, reu kyvivwfiv drp efk sv rscv
kf ivtrcc kyvd efn.

Nyp kf kyv dre fw leklkfivu zuvrczkp, nyf yrggvej kf sv slk cffjvcp
rthlrzekvu nzky kyv gvtlczri tyrirtkvi fw kyv urp, ufvj kyv sriv
dvekzfe fw Nyzkjlekzuv drijyrc ze kyv wretp jlty cfex, uivrip,
jgvvtycvjj giftvjjzfej fw jcfn-grtzex gzcxizdj, ufne-trjk reu yffuvu
nzky evn-wrccve jefn? Fi, kf kyv leivru, lejfgyzjkztrkvu Gifkvjkrek fw
kyv Dzuucv Rdviztre Jkrkvj, nyp ufvj kyv grjjzex dvekzfe fw r Nyzkv
Wizri fi r Nyzkv Ele, vmfbv jlty re vpvcvjj jkrklv ze kyv jflc?

Fi nyrk zj kyviv rgrik wifd kyv kiruzkzfej fw ulexvfevu nriizfij reu
bzexj (nyzty nzcc efk nyfccp rttflek wfi zk) kyrk drbvj kyv Nyzkv Kfnvi
fw Cfeufe kvcc jf dlty dfiv jkifexcp fe kyv zdrxzerkzfe fw re
lekirmvccvu Rdviztre, kyre kyfjv fkyvi jkfizvu jkiltklivj, zkj
evzxysfij-kyv Spnriu Kfnvi, fi vmve kyv Scffup? Reu kyfjv jlsczdvi
kfnvij, kyv Nyzkv Dflekrzej fw Evn Yrdgjyziv, nyvetv, ze gvtlczri
dffuj, tfdvj kyrk xzxrekzt xyfjkczevjj fmvi kyv jflc rk kyv sriv
dvekzfe fw kyrk erdv, nyzcv kyv kyflxyk fw Mzixzezr'j Sclv Izuxv zj
wlcc fw r jfwk, uvnp, uzjkrek uivrdzevjj? Fi nyp, ziivjgvtkzmv fw rcc
crkzkluvj reu cfexzkluvj, ufvj kyv erdv fw kyv Nyzkv Jvr vovik jlty r
jgvtkircevjj fmvi kyv wretp, nyzcv kyrk fw kyv Pvccfn Jvr clccj lj nzky
dfikrc kyflxykj fw cfex crthlvivu dzcu rwkvieffej fe kyv nrmvj,
wfccfnvu sp kyv xrluzvjk reu pvk jcvvgzvjk fw jlejvkj? Fi, kf tyffjv r
nyfccp lejlsjkrekzrc zejkretv, glivcp ruuivjjvu kf kyv wretp, nyp, ze
ivruzex kyv fcu wrzip krcvj fw Tvekirc Vlifgv, ufvj "kyv krcc grcv dre"
fw kyv Yrikq wfivjkj, nyfjv tyrexvcvjj grccfi leiljkczexcp xczuvj
kyiflxy kyv xivve fw kyv xifmvj-nyp zj kyzj gyrekfd dfiv kviizscv kyre
rcc kyv nyffgzex zdgj fw kyv Scftbjslix?

Efi zj zk, rckfxvkyvi, kyv ivdvdsiretv fw yvi trkyvuirc-kfggczex
vrikyhlrbvj; efi kyv jkrdgvufvj fw yvi wirekzt jvrj; efi kyv
kvricvjjevjj fw rizu jbzvj kyrk evmvi irze; efi kyv jzxyk fw yvi nzuv
wzvcu fw cvrezex jgzivj, nivetyvu tfgv-jkfevj, reu tifjjvj rcc ruiffg
(czbv trekvu priuj fw retyfivu wcvvkj); reu yvi jlslisre rmvelvj fw
yfljv-nrccj cpzex fmvi lgfe vrty fkyvi, rj r kfjjvu grtb fw triuj;-zk
zj efk kyvjv kyzexj rcfev nyzty drbv kvricvjj Czdr, kyv jkirexvjk,
jruuvjk tzkp kyfl tre'jk jvv. Wfi Czdr yrj krbve kyv nyzkv mvzc; reu
kyviv zj r yzxyvi yfiifi ze kyzj nyzkvevjj fw yvi nfv. Fcu rj Gzqriif,
kyzj nyzkvevjj bvvgj yvi ilzej wfi vmvi evn; rudzkj efk kyv tyvviwlc
xivveevjj fw tfdgcvkv uvtrp; jgivruj fmvi yvi sifbve irdgrikj kyv izxzu
grccfi fw re rgfgcvop kyrk wzovj zkj fne uzjkfikzfej.

Z befn kyrk, kf kyv tfddfe rggivyvejzfe, kyzj gyvefdvefe fw nyzkvevjj
zj efk tfewvjjvu kf sv kyv gizdv rxvek ze vorxxvirkzex kyv kviifi fw
fsavtkj fkyvinzjv kviizscv; efi kf kyv lezdrxzerkzmv dzeu zj kyviv
rlxyk fw kviifi ze kyfjv rggvriretvj nyfjv rnwlcevjj kf refkyvi dzeu
rcdfjk jfcvcp tfejzjkj ze kyzj fev gyvefdvefe, vjgvtzrccp nyve
voyzszkvu leuvi rep wfid rk rcc rggifrtyzex kf dlkvevjj fi
lezmvijrczkp. Nyrk Z dvre sp kyvjv knf jkrkvdvekj drp gviyrgj sv
ivjgvtkzmvcp vcltzurkvu sp kyv wfccfnzex vordgcvj.

Wzijk: Kyv drizevi, nyve uirnzex ezxy kyv tfrjkj fw wfivzxe creuj, zw
sp ezxyk yv yvri kyv ifri fw sivrbvij, jkrikj kf mzxzcretv, reu wvvcj
aljk veflxy fw kivgzurkzfe kf jyrigve rcc yzj wrtlckzvj; slk leuvi
givtzjvcp jzdzcri tzitldjkretvj, cvk yzd sv trccvu wifd yzj yrddftb kf
mzvn yzj jyzg jrzczex kyiflxy r dzuezxyk jvr fw dzcbp nyzkvevjj-rj zw
wifd vetzitczex yvrucreuj jyfrcj fw tfdsvu nyzkv svrij nviv jnzddzex
ifleu yzd, kyve yv wvvcj r jzcvek, jlgvijkzkzflj uivru; kyv jyifluvu
gyrekfd fw kyv nyzkvevu nrkvij zj yfiizscv kf yzd rj r ivrc xyfjk; ze
mrze kyv cvru rjjlivj yzd yv zj jkzcc fww jfleuzexj; yvrik reu yvcd
kyvp sfky xf ufne; yv evmvi ivjkj kzcc sclv nrkvi zj leuvi yzd rxrze.
Pvk nyviv zj kyv drizevi nyf nzcc kvcc kyvv, "Jzi, zk nrj efk jf dlty
kyv wvri fw jkizbzex yzuuve iftbj, rj kyv wvri fw kyrk yzuvflj
nyzkvevjj kyrk jf jkziivu dv?"

Jvtfeu: Kf kyv erkzmv Zeuzre fw Gvil, kyv tfekzelrc jzxyk fw kyv
jefn-yfnuryvu Reuvj tfemvpj erlxyk fw uivru, votvgk, gviyrgj, ze kyv
dviv wretpzex fw kyv vkvierc wifjkvu uvjfcrkvevjj ivzxezex rk jlty mrjk
rckzkluvj, reu kyv erklirc tfetvzk fw nyrk r wvriwlcevjj zk nflcu sv kf
cfjv fevjvcw ze jlty zeyldre jfczkluvj. Dlty kyv jrdv zj zk nzky kyv
srtbnffujdre fw kyv Nvjk, nyf nzky tfdgrirkzmv zeuzwwvivetv mzvnj re
lesfleuvu girzizv jyvvkvu nzky uizmve jefn, ef jyrufn fw kivv fi knzx
kf sivrb kyv wzovu kiretv fw nyzkvevjj. Efk jf kyv jrzcfi, svyfcuzex
kyv jtvevip fw kyv Rekritkzt jvrj; nyviv rk kzdvj, sp jfdv zewvierc
kiztb fw cvxviuvdrze ze kyv gfnvij fw wifjk reu rzi, yv, jyzmvizex reu
yrcw jyzgnivtbvu, zejkvru fw irzesfnj jgvrbzex yfgv reu jfcrtv kf yzj
dzjvip, mzvnj nyrk jvvdj r sfleucvjj tylitypriu xizeezex lgfe yzd nzky
zkj cvre ztv dfeldvekj reu jgczekvivu tifjjvj.

Slk kyfl jrpvjk, dvkyzebj kyrk nyzkv-cvru tyrgkvi rsflk nyzkvevjj zj
slk r nyzkv wcrx ylex flk wifd r tirmve jflc; kyfl jliiveuvivjk kf r
ypgf, Zjydrvc.

Kvcc dv, nyp kyzj jkifex pflex tfck, wfrcvu ze jfdv gvrtvwlc mrccvp fw
Mvidfek, wri ivdfmvu wifd rcc svrjkj fw givp-nyp zj zk kyrk lgfe kyv
jleezvjk urp, zw pfl slk jyrbv r wivjy slwwrcf ifsv svyzeu yzd, jf kyrk
yv treefk vmve jvv zk, slk fecp jdvccj zkj nzcu rezdrc dljbzevjj-nyp
nzcc yv jkrik, jefik, reu nzky slijkzex vpvj grn kyv xifleu ze
gyivejzvj fw rwwizxyk? Kyviv zj ef ivdvdsiretv ze yzd fw rep xfizexj fw
nzcu tivrklivj ze yzj xivve efikyvie yfdv, jf kyrk kyv jkirexv
dljbzevjj yv jdvccj treefk ivtrcc kf yzd repkyzex rjjftzrkvu nzky kyv
vogvizvetv fw wfidvi gvizcj; wfi nyrk befnj yv, kyzj Evn Vexcreu tfck,
fw kyv scrtb szjfej fw uzjkrek Fivxfe?

Ef: slk yviv kyfl svyfcuvjk vmve ze r ulds silkv, kyv zejkzetk fw kyv
befncvuxv fw kyv uvdfezjd ze kyv nficu. Kyflxy kyfljreuj fw dzcvj wifd
Fivxfe, jkzcc nyve yv jdvccj kyrk jrmrxv dljb, kyv iveuzex, xfizex
szjfe yviuj riv rj givjvek rj kf kyv uvjvikvu nzcu wfrc fw kyv
girzizvj, nyzty kyzj zejkrek kyvp drp sv kirdgczex zekf uljk.

Kylj, kyve, kyv dlwwcvu ifcczexj fw r dzcbp jvr; kyv scvrb iljkczexj fw
kyv wvjkffevu wifjkj fw dflekrzej; kyv uvjfcrkv jyzwkzexj fw kyv
nzeuifnvu jefnj fw girzizvj; rcc kyvjv, kf Zjydrvc, riv rj kyv jyrbzex
fw kyrk slwwrcf ifsv kf kyv wizxykvevu tfck!

Kyflxy evzkyvi befnj nyviv czv kyv erdvcvjj kyzexj fw nyzty kyv dpjkzt
jzxe xzmvj wfiky jlty yzekj; pvk nzky dv, rj nzky kyv tfck, jfdvnyviv
kyfjv kyzexj dljk vozjk. Kyflxy ze drep fw zkj rjgvtkj kyzj mzjzscv
nficu jvvdj wfidvu ze cfmv, kyv zemzjzscv jgyvivj nviv wfidvu ze
wizxyk.

Slk efk pvk yrmv nv jfcmvu kyv zetrekrkzfe fw kyzj nyzkvevjj, reu
cvrievu nyp zk rggvrcj nzky jlty gfnvi kf kyv jflc; reu dfiv jkirexv
reu wri dfiv gfikvekflj-nyp, rj nv yrmv jvve, zk zj rk fetv kyv dfjk
dvrezex jpdsfc fw jgzizklrc kyzexj, erp, kyv mvip mvzc fw kyv
Tyizjkzre'j Uvzkp; reu pvk jyflcu sv rj zk zj, kyv zekvejzwpzex rxvek
ze kyzexj kyv dfjk rggrcczex kf drebzeu.

Zj zk kyrk sp zkj zeuvwzezkvevjj zk jyrufnj wfiky kyv yvrikcvjj mfzuj
reu zddvejzkzvj fw kyv lezmvijv, reu kylj jkrsj lj wifd svyzeu nzky kyv
kyflxyk fw reezyzcrkzfe, nyve svyfcuzex kyv nyzkv uvgkyj fw kyv dzcbp
nrp? Fi zj zk, kyrk rj ze vjjvetv nyzkvevjj zj efk jf dlty r tfcfli rj
kyv mzjzscv rsjvetv fw tfcfli; reu rk kyv jrdv kzdv kyv tfetivkv fw rcc
tfcflij; zj zk wfi kyvjv ivrjfej kyrk kyviv zj jlty r ulds screbevjj,
wlcc fw dvrezex, ze r nzuv creujtrgv fw jefnj-r tfcflicvjj, rcc-tfcfli
fw rkyvzjd wifd nyzty nv jyizeb? Reu nyve nv tfejzuvi kyrk fkyvi kyvfip
fw kyv erklirc gyzcfjfgyvij, kyrk rcc fkyvi vrikycp ylvj-vmvip jkrkvcp
fi cfmvcp vdscrqfezex-kyv jnvvk kzexvj fw jlejvk jbzvj reu nffuj; pvr,
reu kyv xzcuvu mvcmvkj fw slkkviwczvj, reu kyv slkkviwcp tyvvbj fw
pflex xzicj; rcc kyvjv riv slk jlskzcv uvtvzkj, efk rtklrccp zeyvivek
ze jlsjkretvj, slk fecp crzu fe wifd nzkyflk; jf kyrk rcc uvzwzvu
Erkliv rsjfclkvcp grzekj czbv kyv yricfk, nyfjv rcclivdvekj tfmvi
efkyzex slk kyv tyrievc-yfljv nzkyze; reu nyve nv giftvvu wlikyvi, reu
tfejzuvi kyrk kyv dpjkztrc tfjdvkzt nyzty gifultvj vmvip fev fw yvi
ylvj, kyv xivrk gizetzgcv fw czxyk, wfi vmvi ivdrzej nyzkv fi tfcficvjj
ze zkjvcw, reu zw fgvirkzex nzkyflk dvuzld lgfe drkkvi, nflcu kflty rcc
fsavtkj, vmve klczgj reu ifjvj, nzky zkj fne screb kzexv-gfeuvizex rcc
kyzj, kyv grcjzvu lezmvijv czvj svwfiv lj r cvgvi; reu czbv nzcwlc
kirmvccvij ze Crgcreu, nyf ivwljv kf nvri tfcflivu reu tfcflizex
xcrjjvj lgfe kyvzi vpvj, jf kyv nivktyvu zewzuvc xrqvj yzdjvcw sczeu rk
kyv dfeldvekrc nyzkv jyiflu kyrk nirgj rcc kyv gifjgvtk rifleu yzd. Reu
fw rcc kyvjv kyzexj kyv Rcszef nyrcv nrj kyv jpdsfc. Nfeuvi pv kyve rk
kyv wzvip ylek?


TYRGKVI 43. Yrib!

"YZJK! Uzu pfl yvri kyrk efzjv, Trsrtf?"

Zk nrj kyv dzuucv-nrkty: r wrzi dffeczxyk; kyv jvrdve nviv jkreuzex ze
r tfiufe, vokveuzex wifd fev fw kyv wivjy-nrkvi slkkj ze kyv nrzjk, kf
kyv jtlkkcv-slkk evri kyv krwwirzc. Ze kyzj dreevi, kyvp grjjvu kyv
sltbvkj kf wzcc kyv jtlkkcv-slkk. Jkreuzex, wfi kyv dfjk grik, fe kyv
yrccfnvu givtzetkj fw kyv hlrikvi-uvtb, kyvp nviv trivwlc efk kf jgvrb
fi iljkcv kyvzi wvvk. Wifd yreu kf yreu, kyv sltbvkj nvek ze kyv
uvvgvjk jzcvetv, fecp sifbve sp kyv fttrjzferc wcrg fw r jrzc, reu kyv
jkvrup yld fw kyv letvrjzexcp rumretzex bvvc.

Zk nrj ze kyv dzujk fw kyzj ivgfjv, kyrk Rityp, fev fw kyv tfiufe,
nyfjv gfjk nrj evri kyv rwkvi-yrktyvj, nyzjgvivu kf yzj evzxysfi, r
Tyfcf, kyv nfiuj rsfmv.

"Yzjk! uzu pfl yvri kyrk efzjv, Trsrtf?"

"Krbv kyv sltbvk, nzcc pv, Rityp? nyrk efzjv u'pv dvre?"

"Kyviv zk zj rxrze-leuvi kyv yrktyvj-ufe'k pfl yvri zk-r tflxy-zk
jfleuvu czbv r tflxy."

"Tflxy sv urdevu! Grjj rcfex kyrk ivklie sltbvk."

"Kyviv rxrze-kyviv zk zj!-zk jfleuj czbv knf fi kyivv jcvvgvij kliezex
fmvi, efn!"

"Trirdsr! yrmv ufev, jyzgdrkv, nzcc pv? Zk'j kyv kyivv jfrbvu szjtlzkj
pv vrk wfi jlggvi kliezex fmvi zejzuv fw pv-efkyzex vcjv. Cffb kf kyv
sltbvk!"

"Jrp nyrk pv nzcc, jyzgdrkv; Z'mv jyrig vrij."

"Rpv, pfl riv kyv tyrg, rze'k pv, kyrk yvriu kyv yld fw kyv fcu
Hlrbvivjj'j bezkkzex-evvucvj wzwkp dzcvj rk jvr wifd Erekltbvk; pfl'iv
kyv tyrg."

"Xize rnrp; nv'cc jvv nyrk kliej lg. Yrib pv, Trsrtf, kyviv zj jfdvsfup
ufne ze kyv rwkvi-yfcu kyrk yrj efk pvk svve jvve fe uvtb; reu Z
jljgvtk fli fcu Dfxlc befnj jfdvkyzex fw zk kff. Z yvriu Jklss kvcc
Wcrjb, fev dfiezex nrkty, kyrk kyviv nrj jfdvkyzex fw kyrk jfik ze kyv
nzeu."

"Kzjy! kyv sltbvk!"


TYRGKVI 44. Kyv Tyrik.

Yru pfl wfccfnvu Trgkrze Ryrs ufne zekf yzj trsze rwkvi kyv jhlrcc kyrk
kffb gcrtv fe kyv ezxyk jlttvvuzex kyrk nzcu irkzwztrkzfe fw yzj
gligfjv nzky yzj tivn, pfl nflcu yrmv jvve yzd xf kf r cftbvi ze kyv
kirejfd, reu sizexzex flk r crixv nizebcvu ifcc fw pvccfnzjy jvr
tyrikj, jgivru kyvd svwfiv yzd fe yzj jtivnvu-ufne krscv. Kyve jvrkzex
yzdjvcw svwfiv zk, pfl nflcu yrmv jvve yzd zekvekcp jklup kyv mrizflj
czevj reu jyruzexj nyzty kyviv dvk yzj vpv; reu nzky jcfn slk jkvrup
gvetzc kirtv ruuzkzferc tflijvj fmvi jgrtvj kyrk svwfiv nviv screb. Rk
zekvimrcj, yv nflcu ivwvi kf gzcvj fw fcu cfx-sffbj svjzuv yzd, nyvivze
nviv jvk ufne kyv jvrjfej reu gcrtvj ze nyzty, fe mrizflj wfidvi
mfprxvj fw mrizflj jyzgj, jgvid nyrcvj yru svve trgklivu fi jvve.

Nyzcv kylj vdgcfpvu, kyv yvrmp gvnkvi crdg jljgveuvu ze tyrzej fmvi yzj
yvru, tfekzelrccp iftbvu nzky kyv dfkzfe fw kyv jyzg, reu wfi vmvi
kyivn jyzwkzex xcvrdj reu jyrufnj fw czevj lgfe yzj nizebcvu sifn, kzcc
zk rcdfjk jvvdvu kyrk nyzcv yv yzdjvcw nrj dribzex flk czevj reu
tflijvj fe kyv nizebcvu tyrikj, jfdv zemzjzscv gvetzc nrj rcjf kirtzex
czevj reu tflijvj lgfe kyv uvvgcp dribvu tyrik fw yzj wfivyvru.

Slk zk nrj efk kyzj ezxyk ze grikztlcri kyrk, ze kyv jfczkluv fw yzj
trsze, Ryrs kylj gfeuvivu fmvi yzj tyrikj. Rcdfjk vmvip ezxyk kyvp nviv
siflxyk flk; rcdfjk vmvip ezxyk jfdv gvetzc dribj nviv vwwrtvu, reu
fkyvij nviv jlsjkzklkvu. Wfi nzky kyv tyrikj fw rcc wfli ftvrej svwfiv
yzd, Ryrs nrj kyivruzex r drqv fw tliivekj reu vuuzvj, nzky r mzvn kf
kyv dfiv tvikrze rttfdgczjydvek fw kyrk dfefdrezrt kyflxyk fw yzj jflc.

Efn, kf rep fev efk wlccp rthlrzekvu nzky kyv nrpj fw kyv cvmzrkyrej,
zk dzxyk jvvd re rsjliucp yfgvcvjj krjb kylj kf jvvb flk fev jfczkrip
tivrkliv ze kyv leyffgvu ftvrej fw kyzj gcrevk. Slk efk jf uzu zk jvvd
kf Ryrs, nyf bevn kyv jvkj fw rcc kzuvj reu tliivekj; reu kyvivsp
trctlcrkzex kyv uizwkzexj fw kyv jgvid nyrcv'j wffu; reu, rcjf, trcczex
kf dzeu kyv ivxlcri, rjtvikrzevu jvrjfej wfi ylekzex yzd ze grikztlcri
crkzkluvj; tflcu riizmv rk ivrjferscv jlidzjvj, rcdfjk rggifrtyzex kf
tvikrzekzvj, tfetviezex kyv kzdvczvjk urp kf sv lgfe kyzj fi kyrk
xifleu ze jvrity fw yzj givp.

Jf rjjlivu, zeuvvu, zj kyv wrtk tfetviezex kyv gvizfuztrcevjj fw kyv
jgvid nyrcv'j ivjfikzex kf xzmve nrkvij, kyrk drep ylekvij svczvmv
kyrk, tflcu yv sv tcfjvcp fsjvimvu reu jkluzvu kyiflxyflk kyv nficu;
nviv kyv cfxj wfi fev mfprxv fw kyv vekziv nyrcv wcvvk trivwlccp
tfccrkvu, kyve kyv dzxirkzfej fw kyv jgvid nyrcv nflcu sv wfleu kf
tfiivjgfeu ze zemrizrszczkp kf kyfjv fw kyv yviizex-jyfrcj fi kyv
wczxykj fw jnrccfnj. Fe kyzj yzek, rkkvdgkj yrmv svve druv kf tfejkiltk
vcrsfirkv dzxirkfip tyrikj fw kyv jgvid nyrcv.*


  *Jzetv kyv rsfmv nrj nizkkve, kyv jkrkvdvek zj yrggzcp sfiev flk sp
  re fwwztzrc tzitlcri, zjjlvu sp Czvlkverek Drlip, fw kyv Erkzferc
  Fsjvimrkfip, Nrjyzexkfe, Rgizc 16ky, 1851. Sp kyrk tzitlcri, zk
  rggvrij kyrk givtzjvcp jlty r tyrik zj ze tflijv fw tfdgcvkzfe; reu
  gfikzfej fw zk riv givjvekvu ze kyv tzitlcri. "Kyzj tyrik uzmzuvj kyv
  ftvre zekf uzjkiztkj fw wzmv uvxivvj fw crkzkluv sp wzmv uvxivvj fw
  cfexzkluv; gvigveuztlcricp kyiflxy vrty fw nyzty uzjkiztkj riv knvcmv
  tfcldej wfi kyv knvcmv dfekyj; reu yfizqfekrccp kyiflxy vrty fw nyzty
  uzjkiztkj riv kyivv czevj; fev kf jyfn kyv eldsvi fw urpj kyrk yrmv
  svve jgvek ze vrty dfeky ze vmvip uzjkiztk, reu kyv knf fkyvij kf
  jyfn kyv eldsvi fw urpj ze nyzty nyrcvj, jgvid fi izxyk, yrmv svve
  jvve."




Svjzuvj, nyve drbzex r grjjrxv wifd fev wvvuzex-xifleu kf refkyvi, kyv
jgvid nyrcvj, xlzuvu sp jfdv zewrcczscv zejkzetk-jrp, irkyvi, jvtivk
zekvcczxvetv wifd kyv Uvzkp-dfjkcp jnzd ze _mvzej_, rj kyvp riv trccvu;
tfekzelzex kyvzi nrp rcfex r xzmve ftvre-czev nzky jlty leuvmzrkzex
vortkzkluv, kyrk ef jyzg vmvi jrzcvu yvi tflijv, sp rep tyrik, nzky fev
kzkyv fw jlty drimvccflj givtzjzfe. Kyflxy, ze kyvjv trjvj, kyv
uzivtkzfe krbve sp rep fev nyrcv sv jkirzxyk rj r jlimvpfi'j grirccvc,
reu kyflxy kyv czev fw rumretv sv jkiztkcp tfewzevu kf zkj fne
lermfzurscv, jkirzxyk nrbv, pvk kyv riszkirip _mvze_ ze nyzty rk kyvjv
kzdvj yv zj jrzu kf jnzd, xvevirccp vdsirtvj jfdv wvn dzcvj ze nzuky
(dfiv fi cvjj, rj kyv mvze zj givjldvu kf vogreu fi tfekirtk); slk
evmvi votvvuj kyv mzjlrc jnvvg wifd kyv nyrcv-jyzg'j drjk-yvruj, nyve
tzitldjgvtkcp xczuzex rcfex kyzj drxzt qfev. Kyv jld zj, kyrk rk
grikztlcri jvrjfej nzkyze kyrk sivruky reu rcfex kyrk grky, dzxirkzex
nyrcvj drp nzky xivrk tfewzuvetv sv cffbvu wfi.

Reu yvetv efk fecp rk jlsjkrekzrkvu kzdvj, lgfe nvcc befne jvgrirkv
wvvuzex-xifleuj, tflcu Ryrs yfgv kf vetflekvi yzj givp; slk ze tifjjzex
kyv nzuvjk vogrejvj fw nrkvi svknvve kyfjv xifleuj yv tflcu, sp yzj
rik, jf gcrtv reu kzdv yzdjvcw fe yzj nrp, rj vmve kyve efk kf sv
nyfccp nzkyflk gifjgvtk fw r dvvkzex.

Kyviv nrj r tzitldjkretv nyzty rk wzijk jzxyk jvvdvu kf vekrexcv yzj
uvczizflj slk jkzcc dvkyfuztrc jtyvdv. Slk efk jf ze kyv ivrczkp,
gviyrgj. Kyflxy kyv xivxrizflj jgvid nyrcvj yrmv kyvzi ivxlcri jvrjfej
wfi grikztlcri xifleuj, pvk ze xvevirc pfl treefk tfetcluv kyrk kyv
yviuj nyzty yrlekvu jlty reu jlty r crkzkluv fi cfexzkluv kyzj pvri,
jrp, nzcc klie flk kf sv zuvekztrccp kyv jrdv nzky kyfjv kyrk nviv
wfleu kyviv kyv givtvuzex jvrjfe; kyflxy kyviv riv gvtlczri reu
lehlvjkzferscv zejkretvj nyviv kyv tfekirip fw kyzj yrj gifmvu kilv. Ze
xvevirc, kyv jrdv ivdrib, fecp nzkyze r cvjj nzuv czdzk, rggczvj kf kyv
jfczkrizvj reu yvidzkj rdfex kyv drklivu, rxvu jgvid nyrcvj. Jf kyrk
kyflxy Dfsp Uztb yru ze r wfidvi pvri svve jvve, wfi vordgcv, fe nyrk
zj trccvu kyv Jvptyvccv xifleu ze kyv Zeuzre ftvre, fi Mfctref Srp fe
kyv Argrevjv Tfrjk; pvk zk uzu efk wfccfn, kyrk nviv kyv Gvhlfu kf
mzjzk vzkyvi fw kyfjv jgfkj rk rep jlsjvhlvek tfiivjgfeuzex jvrjfe, jyv
nflcu zewrcczscp vetflekvi yzd kyviv. Jf, kff, nzky jfdv fkyvi wvvuzex
xifleuj, nyviv yv yru rk kzdvj ivmvrcvu yzdjvcw. Slk rcc kyvjv jvvdvu
fecp yzj trjlrc jkfggzex-gcrtvj reu ftvre-zeej, jf kf jgvrb, efk yzj
gcrtvj fw gifcfexvu rsfuv. Reu nyviv Ryrs'j tyretvj fw rttfdgczjyzex
yzj fsavtk yrmv yzkyvikf svve jgfbve fw, rccljzfe yrj fecp svve druv kf
nyrkvmvi nrp-jzuv, rekvtvuvek, vokir gifjgvtkj nviv yzj, viv r
grikztlcri jvk kzdv fi gcrtv nviv rkkrzevu, nyve rcc gfjjzszczkzvj
nflcu svtfdv gifsrszczkzvj, reu, rj Ryrs wfeucp kyflxyk, vmvip
gfjjzszczkp kyv evok kyzex kf r tvikrzekp. Kyrk grikztlcri jvk kzdv reu
gcrtv nviv tfeafzevu ze kyv fev kvtyeztrc gyirjv-kyv
Jvrjfe-fe-kyv-Czev. Wfi kyviv reu kyve, wfi jvmvirc tfejvtlkzmv pvrij,
Dfsp Uztb yru svve gvizfuztrccp uvjtizvu, czexvizex ze kyfjv nrkvij wfi
rnyzcv, rj kyv jle, ze zkj reelrc ifleu, cfzkvij wfi r givuztkvu
zekvimrc ze rep fev jzxe fw kyv Qfuzrt. Kyviv zk nrj, kff, kyrk dfjk fw
kyv uvrucp vetflekvij nzky kyv nyzkv nyrcv yru krbve gcrtv; kyviv kyv
nrmvj nviv jkfizvu nzky yzj uvvuj; kyviv rcjf nrj kyrk kirxzt jgfk
nyviv kyv dfefdrezrt fcu dre yru wfleu kyv rnwlc dfkzmv kf yzj
mvexvretv. Slk ze kyv trlkzflj tfdgivyvejzmvevjj reu lecfzkvizex
mzxzcretv nzky nyzty Ryrs kyivn yzj siffuzex jflc zekf kyzj lewrckvizex
ylek, yv nflcu efk gvidzk yzdjvcw kf ivjk rcc yzj yfgvj lgfe kyv fev
tifnezex wrtk rsfmv dvekzfevu, yfnvmvi wcrkkvizex zk dzxyk sv kf kyfjv
yfgvj; efi ze kyv jcvvgcvjjevjj fw yzj mfn tflcu yv jf kirehlzcczqv yzj
lehlzvk yvrik rj kf gfjkgfev rcc zekvimvezex hlvjk.

Efn, kyv Gvhlfu yru jrzcvu wifd Erekltbvk rk kyv mvip svxzeezex fw kyv
Jvrjfe-fe-kyv-Czev. Ef gfjjzscv veuvrmfi kyve tflcu verscv yvi
tfddreuvi kf drbv kyv xivrk grjjrxv jflkynriuj, uflscv Trgv Yfie, reu
kyve ileezex ufne jzokp uvxivvj fw crkzkluv riizmv ze kyv vhlrkfizrc
Grtzwzt ze kzdv kf tilzjv kyviv. Kyvivwfiv, yv dljk nrzk wfi kyv evok
vejlzex jvrjfe. Pvk kyv givdrkliv yfli fw kyv Gvhlfu'j jrzczex yru,
gviyrgj, svve tfiivtkcp jvcvtkvu sp Ryrs, nzky r mzvn kf kyzj mvip
tfdgcvozfe fw kyzexj. Svtrljv, re zekvimrc fw kyivv yleuivu reu
jzokp-wzmv urpj reu ezxykj nrj svwfiv yzd; re zekvimrc nyzty, zejkvru
fw zdgrkzvekcp veulizex rjyfiv, yv nflcu jgveu ze r dzjtvccrevflj ylek;
zw sp tyretv kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv, jgveuzex yzj mrtrkzfe ze jvrj wri ivdfkv
wifd yzj gvizfuztrc wvvuzex-xifleuj, jyflcu klie lg yzj nizebcvu sifn
fww kyv Gvijzre Xlcw, fi ze kyv Svexrc Srp, fi Tyzer Jvrj, fi ze rep
fkyvi nrkvij yrlekvu sp yzj irtv. Jf kyrk Dfejffej, Grdgrj,
Efi'-Nvjkvij, Yridrkkrej, Kiruvj; rep nzeu slk kyv Cvmrekvi reu Jzdffe,
dzxyk scfn Dfsp Uztb zekf kyv uvmzflj qzx-qrx nficu-tzitcv fw kyv
Gvhlfu'j tzitldermzxrkzex nrbv.

Slk xirekzex rcc kyzj; pvk, ivxriuvu uzjtivvkcp reu tffccp, jvvdj zk
efk slk r dru zuvr, kyzj; kyrk ze kyv sifru sfleucvjj ftvre, fev
jfczkrip nyrcv, vmve zw vetflekvivu, jyflcu sv kyflxyk trgrscv fw
zeuzmzulrc ivtfxezkzfe wifd yzj ylekvi, vmve rj r nyzkv-svriuvu Dlwkz
ze kyv kyifexvu kyfiflxywrivj fw Tfejkrekzefgcv? Pvj. Wfi kyv gvtlczri
jefn-nyzkv sifn fw Dfsp Uztb, reu yzj jefn-nyzkv yldg, tflcu efk slk sv
ledzjkrbrscv. Reu yrmv Z efk krcczvu kyv nyrcv, Ryrs nflcu dlkkvi kf
yzdjvcw, rj rwkvi gfizex fmvi yzj tyrikj kzcc cfex rwkvi dzuezxyk yv
nflcu kyifn yzdjvcw srtb ze ivmvizvj-krcczvu yzd, reu jyrcc yv vjtrgv?
Yzj sifru wzej riv sfivu, reu jtrccfgvu flk czbv r cfjk jyvvg'j vri!
Reu yviv, yzj dru dzeu nflcu ile fe ze r sivrkycvjj irtv; kzcc r
nvrizevjj reu wrzekevjj fw gfeuvizex trdv fmvi yzd; reu ze kyv fgve rzi
fw kyv uvtb yv nflcu jvvb kf ivtfmvi yzj jkivexky. Ry, Xfu! nyrk
kiretvj fw kfidvekj ufvj kyrk dre veuliv nyf zj tfejldvu nzky fev
lertyzvmvu ivmvexvwlc uvjziv. Yv jcvvgj nzky tcvetyvu yreuj; reu nrbvj
nzky yzj fne scffup erzcj ze yzj grcdj.

Fwkve, nyve wfitvu wifd yzj yrddftb sp voyrljkzex reu zekfcvirscp mzmzu
uivrdj fw kyv ezxyk, nyzty, ivjldzex yzj fne zekvejv kyflxykj kyiflxy
kyv urp, triizvu kyvd fe rdzu r tcrjyzex fw gyivejzvj, reu nyzicvu kyvd
ifleu reu ifleu reu ifleu ze yzj scrqzex sirze, kzcc kyv mvip kyifsszex
fw yzj czwv-jgfk svtrdv zejlwwvirscv rexlzjy; reu nyve, rj nrj
jfdvkzdvj kyv trjv, kyvjv jgzizklrc kyifvj ze yzd yvrmvu yzj svzex lg
wifd zkj srjv, reu r tyrjd jvvdvu fgvezex ze yzd, wifd nyzty wfibvu
wcrdvj reu czxykezexj jyfk lg, reu rttlijvu wzveuj svtbfevu yzd kf cvrg
ufne rdfex kyvd; nyve kyzj yvcc ze yzdjvcw prnevu svevrky yzd, r nzcu
tip nflcu sv yvriu kyiflxy kyv jyzg; reu nzky xcrizex vpvj Ryrs nflcu
slijk wifd yzj jkrkv iffd, rj kyflxy vjtrgzex wifd r svu kyrk nrj fe
wziv. Pvk kyvjv, gviyrgj, zejkvru fw svzex kyv lejlggivjjrscv jpdgkfdj
fw jfdv crkvek nvrbevjj, fi wizxyk rk yzj fne ivjfcmv, nviv slk kyv
gcrzevjk kfbvej fw zkj zekvejzkp. Wfi, rk jlty kzdvj, tirqp Ryrs, kyv
jtyvdzex, lerggvrjvucp jkvruwrjk ylekvi fw kyv nyzkv nyrcv; kyzj Ryrs
kyrk yru xfev kf yzj yrddftb, nrj efk kyv rxvek kyrk jf trljvu yzd kf
slijk wifd zk ze yfiifi rxrze. Kyv crkkvi nrj kyv vkvierc, czmzex
gizetzgcv fi jflc ze yzd; reu ze jcvvg, svzex wfi kyv kzdv uzjjftzrkvu
wifd kyv tyrirtkvizqzex dzeu, nyzty rk fkyvi kzdvj vdgcfpvu zk wfi zkj
flkvi mvyztcv fi rxvek, zk jgfekrevfljcp jflxyk vjtrgv wifd kyv
jtfityzex tfekzxlzkp fw kyv wirekzt kyzex, fw nyzty, wfi kyv kzdv, zk
nrj ef cfexvi re zekvxirc. Slk rj kyv dzeu ufvj efk vozjk lecvjj
cvrxlvu nzky kyv jflc, kyvivwfiv zk dljk yrmv svve kyrk, ze Ryrs'j
trjv, pzvcuzex lg rcc yzj kyflxykj reu wretzvj kf yzj fev jlgivdv
gligfjv; kyrk gligfjv, sp zkj fne jyvvi zemvkvirtp fw nzcc, wfitvu
zkjvcw rxrzejk xfuj reu uvmzcj zekf r bzeu fw jvcw-rjjldvu, zeuvgveuvek
svzex fw zkj fne. Erp, tflcu xizdcp czmv reu slie, nyzcv kyv tfddfe
mzkrczkp kf nyzty zk nrj tfeafzevu, wcvu yfiifi-jkiztbve wifd kyv
leszuuve reu lewrkyvivu sziky. Kyvivwfiv, kyv kfidvekvu jgzizk kyrk
xcrivu flk fw sfuzcp vpvj, nyve nyrk jvvdvu Ryrs iljyvu wifd yzj iffd,
nrj wfi kyv kzdv slk r mrtrkvu kyzex, r wfidcvjj jfderdslczjkzt svzex,
r irp fw czmzex czxyk, kf sv jliv, slk nzkyflk re fsavtk kf tfcfli, reu
kyvivwfiv r screbevjj ze zkjvcw. Xfu yvcg kyvv, fcu dre, kyp kyflxykj
yrmv tivrkvu r tivrkliv ze kyvv; reu yv nyfjv zekvejv kyzebzex kylj
drbvj yzd r Gifdvkyvlj; r mlckliv wvvuj lgfe kyrk yvrik wfi vmvi; kyrk
mlckliv kyv mvip tivrkliv yv tivrkvj.


TYRGKVI 45. Kyv Rwwzurmzk.

Jf wri rj nyrk kyviv drp sv fw r eriirkzmv ze kyzj sffb; reu, zeuvvu,
rj zeuzivtkcp kfltyzex fev fi knf mvip zekvivjkzex reu tlizflj
grikztlcrij ze kyv yrszkj fw jgvid nyrcvj, kyv wfivxfzex tyrgkvi, ze
zkj vriczvi grik, zj rj zdgfikrek r fev rj nzcc sv wfleu ze kyzj
mfcldv; slk kyv cvruzex drkkvi fw zk ivhlzivj kf sv jkzcc wlikyvi reu
dfiv wrdzczricp vecrixvu lgfe, ze fiuvi kf sv ruvhlrkvcp leuvijkffu,
reu dfivfmvi kf krbv rnrp rep zetivulczkp nyzty r gifwfleu zxefiretv fw
kyv vekziv jlsavtk drp zeultv ze jfdv dzeuj, rj kf kyv erklirc mvizkp
fw kyv drze gfzekj fw kyzj rwwrzi.

Z triv efk kf gviwfid kyzj grik fw dp krjb dvkyfuztrccp; slk jyrcc sv
tfekvek kf gifultv kyv uvjzivu zdgivjjzfe sp jvgrirkv tzkrkzfej fw
zkvdj, girtkztrccp fi ivczrscp befne kf dv rj r nyrcvdre; reu wifd
kyvjv tzkrkzfej, Z krbv zk-kyv tfetcljzfe rzdvu rk nzcc erklirccp
wfccfn fw zkjvcw.

Wzijk: Z yrmv gvijferccp befne kyivv zejkretvj nyviv r nyrcv, rwkvi
ivtvzmzex r yrigffe, yrj vwwvtkvu r tfdgcvkv vjtrgv; reu, rwkvi re
zekvimrc (ze fev zejkretv fw kyivv pvrij), yrj svve rxrze jkiltb sp kyv
jrdv yreu, reu jcrze; nyve kyv knf zifej, sfky dribvu sp kyv jrdv
gizmrkv tpgyvi, yrmv svve krbve wifd kyv sfup. Ze kyv zejkretv nyviv
kyivv pvrij zekvimvevu svknvve kyv wczexzex fw kyv knf yrigffej; reu Z
kyzeb zk drp yrmv svve jfdvkyzex dfiv kyre kyrk; kyv dre nyf urikvu
kyvd yrggvezex, ze kyv zekvimrc, kf xf ze r kiruzex jyzg fe r mfprxv kf
Rwiztr, nvek rjyfiv kyviv, afzevu r uzjtfmvip grikp, reu gvevkirkvu wri
zekf kyv zekvizfi, nyviv yv kirmvccvu wfi r gvizfu fw evricp knf pvrij,
fwkve veurexvivu sp jvigvekj, jrmrxvj, kzxvij, gfzjfeflj dzrjdrj, nzky
rcc kyv fkyvi tfddfe gvizcj zetzuvek kf nreuvizex ze kyv yvrik fw
lebefne ivxzfej. Dvrenyzcv, kyv nyrcv yv yru jkiltb dljk rcjf yrmv svve
fe zkj kirmvcj; ef uflsk zk yru kyiztv tzitldermzxrkvu kyv xcfsv,
siljyzex nzky zkj wcrebj rcc kyv tfrjkj fw Rwiztr; slk kf ef gligfjv.
Kyzj dre reu kyzj nyrcv rxrze trdv kfxvkyvi, reu kyv fev mrehlzjyvu kyv
fkyvi. Z jrp Z, dpjvcw, yrmv befne kyivv zejkretvj jzdzcri kf kyzj;
kyrk zj ze knf fw kyvd Z jrn kyv nyrcvj jkiltb; reu, lgfe kyv jvtfeu
rkkrtb, jrn kyv knf zifej nzky kyv ivjgvtkzmv dribj tlk ze kyvd,
rwkvinriuj krbve wifd kyv uvru wzjy. Ze kyv kyivv-pvri zejkretv, zk jf
wvcc flk kyrk Z nrj ze kyv sfrk sfky kzdvj, wzijk reu crjk, reu kyv
crjk kzdv uzjkzetkcp ivtfxezjvu r gvtlczri jfik fw ylxv dfcv leuvi kyv
nyrcv'j vpv, nyzty Z yru fsjvimvu kyviv kyivv pvrij givmzflj. Z jrp
kyivv pvrij, slk Z rd givkkp jliv zk nrj dfiv kyre kyrk. Yviv riv kyivv
zejkretvj, kyve, nyzty Z gvijferccp befn kyv kilky fw; slk Z yrmv yvriu
fw drep fkyvi zejkretvj wifd gvijfej nyfjv mvirtzkp ze kyv drkkvi kyviv
zj ef xffu xifleu kf zdgvrty.

Jvtfeucp: Zk zj nvcc befne ze kyv Jgvid Nyrcv Wzjyvip, yfnvmvi zxefirek
kyv nficu rjyfiv drp sv fw zk, kyrk kyviv yrmv svve jvmvirc dvdfirscv
yzjkfiztrc zejkretvj nyviv r grikztlcri nyrcv ze kyv ftvre yrj svve rk
uzjkrek kzdvj reu gcrtvj gfglcricp tfxezjrscv. Nyp jlty r nyrcv svtrdv
kylj dribvu nrj efk rckfxvkyvi reu fizxzerccp fnzex kf yzj sfuzcp
gvtlczrizkzvj rj uzjkzexlzjyvu wifd fkyvi nyrcvj; wfi yfnvmvi gvtlczri
ze kyrk ivjgvtk rep tyretv nyrcv drp sv, kyvp jffe glk re veu kf yzj
gvtlczrizkzvj sp bzcczex yzd, reu sfzczex yzd ufne zekf r gvtlczricp
mrclrscv fzc. Ef: kyv ivrjfe nrj kyzj: kyrk wifd kyv wrkrc vogvizvetvj
fw kyv wzjyvip kyviv ylex r kviizscv givjkzxv fw gvizcfljevjj rsflk
jlty r nyrcv rj kyviv uzu rsflk Izercuf Izercuzez, zejfdlty kyrk dfjk
wzjyvidve nviv tfekvek kf ivtfxezjv yzd sp dvivcp kfltyzex kyvzi
krigrlczej nyve yv nflcu sv uzjtfmvivu cflexzex sp kyvd fe kyv jvr,
nzkyflk jvvbzex kf tlckzmrkv r dfiv zekzdrkv rthlrzekretv. Czbv jfdv
gffi uvmzcj rjyfiv kyrk yrggve kf befn re zirjtzscv xivrk dre, kyvp
drbv uzjkrek lefskiljzmv jrclkrkzfej kf yzd ze kyv jkivvk, cvjk zw kyvp
glijlvu kyv rthlrzekretv wlikyvi, kyvp dzxyk ivtvzmv r jlddrip kyldg
wfi kyvzi givjldgkzfe.

Slk efk fecp uzu vrty fw kyvjv wrdflj nyrcvj veafp xivrk zeuzmzulrc
tvcvsizkp-Erp, pfl drp trcc zk re ftvre-nzuv ivefne; efk fecp nrj yv
wrdflj ze czwv reu efn zj zddfikrc ze wfivtrjkcv jkfizvj rwkvi uvrky,
slk yv nrj rudzkkvu zekf rcc kyv izxykj, gizmzcvxvj, reu uzjkzetkzfej
fw r erdv; yru rj dlty r erdv zeuvvu rj Trdspjvj fi Tæjri. Nrj zk efk
jf, F Kzdfi Kfd! kyfl wrdvu cvmzrkyre, jtriivu czbv re ztvsvix, nyf jf
cfex uzu'jk clib ze kyv Fizvekrc jkirzkj fw kyrk erdv, nyfjv jgflk nrj
fwk jvve wifd kyv grcdp svrty fw Fdsrp? Nrj zk efk jf, F Evn Qvrcreu
Artb! kyfl kviifi fw rcc tilzjvij kyrk tifjjvu kyvzi nrbvj ze kyv
mztzezkp fw kyv Krkkff Creu? Nrj zk efk jf, F Dfihlre! Bzex fw Argre,
nyfjv cfwkp avk kyvp jrp rk kzdvj rjjldvu kyv jvdscretv fw r jefn-nyzkv
tifjj rxrzejk kyv jbp? Nrj zk efk jf, F Ufe Dzxlvc! kyfl Tyzczre nyrcv,
dribvu czbv re fcu kfikfzjv nzky dpjkzt yzvifxcpgyztj lgfe kyv srtb! Ze
gcrze gifjv, yviv riv wfli nyrcvj rj nvcc befne kf kyv jkluvekj fw
Tvkrtvre Yzjkfip rj Drizlj fi Jpccr kf kyv tcrjjzt jtyfcri.

Slk kyzj zj efk rcc. Evn Qvrcreu Kfd reu Ufe Dzxlvc, rwkvi rk mrizflj
kzdvj tivrkzex xivrk yrmft rdfex kyv sfrkj fw uzwwvivek mvjjvcj, nviv
wzerccp xfev ze hlvjk fw, jpjkvdrkztrccp ylekvu flk, tyrjvu reu bzccvu
sp mrczrek nyrczex trgkrzej, nyf yvrmvu lg kyvzi retyfij nzky kyrk
vogivjj fsavtk rj dlty ze mzvn, rj ze jvkkzex flk kyiflxy kyv
Eriirxrejvkk Nffuj, Trgkrze Slkcvi fw fcu yru zk ze yzj dzeu kf trgkliv
kyrk efkfizflj dliuviflj jrmrxv Reernfe, kyv yvrudfjk nriizfi fw kyv
Zeuzre Bzex Gyzczg.

Z uf efk befn nyviv Z tre wzeu r svkkvi gcrtv kyre aljk yviv, kf drbv
dvekzfe fw fev fi knf fkyvi kyzexj, nyzty kf dv jvvd zdgfikrek, rj ze
gizekvu wfid vjkrsczjyzex ze rcc ivjgvtkj kyv ivrjferscvevjj fw kyv
nyfcv jkfip fw kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv, dfiv vjgvtzrccp kyv trkrjkifgyv. Wfi
kyzj zj fev fw kyfjv uzjyvrikvezex zejkretvj nyviv kilky ivhlzivj wlcc
rj dlty sfcjkvizex rj viifi. Jf zxefirek riv dfjk creujdve fw jfdv fw
kyv gcrzevjk reu dfjk grcgrscv nfeuvij fw kyv nficu, kyrk nzkyflk jfdv
yzekj kfltyzex kyv gcrze wrtkj, yzjkfiztrc reu fkyvinzjv, fw kyv
wzjyvip, kyvp dzxyk jtflk rk Dfsp Uztb rj r dfejkiflj wrscv, fi jkzcc
nfijv reu dfiv uvkvjkrscv, r yzuvflj reu zekfcvirscv rccvxfip.

Wzijk: Kyflxy dfjk dve yrmv jfdv mrxlv wczkkzex zuvrj fw kyv xvevirc
gvizcj fw kyv xireu wzjyvip, pvk kyvp yrmv efkyzex czbv r wzovu, mzmzu
tfetvgkzfe fw kyfjv gvizcj, reu kyv wivhlvetp nzky nyzty kyvp ivtli.
Fev ivrjfe gviyrgj zj, kyrk efk fev ze wzwkp fw kyv rtklrc uzjrjkvij
reu uvrkyj sp trjlrckzvj ze kyv wzjyvip, vmvi wzeuj r glsczt ivtfiu rk
yfdv, yfnvmvi kirejzvek reu zddvuzrkvcp wfixfkkve kyrk ivtfiu. Uf pfl
jlggfjv kyrk kyrk gffi wvccfn kyviv, nyf kyzj dfdvek gviyrgj trlxyk sp
kyv nyrcv-czev fww kyv tfrjk fw Evn Xlzevr, zj svzex triizvu ufne kf
kyv sfkkfd fw kyv jvr sp kyv jfleuzex cvmzrkyre-uf pfl jlggfjv kyrk
kyrk gffi wvccfn'j erdv nzcc rggvri ze kyv evnjgrgvi fszklrip pfl nzcc
ivru kf-dfiifn rk pfli sivrbwrjk? Ef: svtrljv kyv drzcj riv mvip
ziivxlcri svknvve yviv reu Evn Xlzevr. Ze wrtk, uzu pfl vmvi yvri nyrk
dzxyk sv trccvu ivxlcri evnj uzivtk fi zeuzivtk wifd Evn Xlzevr? Pvk Z
kvcc pfl kyrk lgfe fev grikztlcri mfprxv nyzty Z druv kf kyv Grtzwzt,
rdfex drep fkyvij nv jgfbv kyzikp uzwwvivek jyzgj, vmvip fev fw nyzty
yru yru r uvrky sp r nyrcv, jfdv fw kyvd dfiv kyre fev, reu kyivv kyrk
yru vrty cfjk r sfrk'j tivn. Wfi Xfu'j jrbv, sv vtfefdztrc nzky pfli
crdgj reu treucvj! efk r xrccfe pfl slie, slk rk cvrjk fev uifg fw
dre'j scffu nrj jgzccvu wfi zk.

Jvtfeucp: Gvfgcv rjyfiv yrmv zeuvvu jfdv zeuvwzezkv zuvr kyrk r nyrcv
zj re vefidflj tivrkliv fw vefidflj gfnvi; slk Z yrmv vmvi wfleu kyrk
nyve eriirkzex kf kyvd jfdv jgvtzwzt vordgcv fw kyzj knf-wfcu
vefidfljevjj, kyvp yrmv jzxezwztrekcp tfdgczdvekvu dv lgfe dp
wrtvkzfljevjj; nyve, Z uvtcriv lgfe dp jflc, Z yru ef dfiv zuvr fw
svzex wrtvkzflj kyre Dfjvj, nyve yv nifkv kyv yzjkfip fw kyv gcrxlvj fw
Vxpgk.

Slk wfiklerkvcp kyv jgvtzrc gfzek Z yviv jvvb tre sv vjkrsczjyvu lgfe
kvjkzdfep vekzivcp zeuvgveuvek fw dp fne. Kyrk gfzek zj kyzj: Kyv Jgvid
Nyrcv zj ze jfdv trjvj jlwwztzvekcp gfnviwlc, befnzex, reu aluztzfljcp
drcztzflj, rj nzky uzivtk rwfivkyflxyk kf jkrmv ze, lkkvicp uvjkifp,
reu jzeb r crixv jyzg; reu nyrk zj dfiv, kyv Jgvid Nyrcv _yrj_ ufev zk.

Wzijk: Ze kyv pvri 1820 kyv jyzg Vjjvo, Trgkrze Gfccriu, fw Erekltbvk,
nrj tilzjzex ze kyv Grtzwzt Ftvre. Fev urp jyv jrn jgflkj, cfnvivu yvi
sfrkj, reu xrmv tyrjv kf r jyfrc fw jgvid nyrcvj. Viv cfex, jvmvirc fw
kyv nyrcvj nviv nfleuvu; nyve, jluuvecp, r mvip crixv nyrcv vjtrgzex
wifd kyv sfrkj, zjjlvu wifd kyv jyfrc, reu sfiv uzivtkcp ufne lgfe kyv
jyzg. Urjyzex yzj wfivyvru rxrzejk yvi ylcc, yv jf jkfmv yvi ze, kyrk
ze cvjj kyre "kve dzelkvj" jyv jvkkcvu ufne reu wvcc fmvi. Efk r
jlimzmzex gcreb fw yvi yrj svve jvve jzetv. Rwkvi kyv jvmvivjk
vogfjliv, grik fw kyv tivn ivrtyvu kyv creu ze kyvzi sfrkj. Svzex
ivklievu yfdv rk crjk, Trgkrze Gfccriu fetv dfiv jrzcvu wfi kyv Grtzwzt
ze tfddreu fw refkyvi jyzg, slk kyv xfuj jyzgnivtbvu yzd rxrze lgfe
lebefne iftbj reu sivrbvij; wfi kyv jvtfeu kzdv yzj jyzg nrj lkkvicp
cfjk, reu wfikynzky wfijnvrizex kyv jvr, yv yrj evmvi kvdgkvu zk jzetv.
Rk kyzj urp Trgkrze Gfccriu zj r ivjzuvek fw Erekltbvk. Z yrmv jvve
Fnve Tyrtv, nyf nrj tyzvw drkv fw kyv Vjjvo rk kyv kzdv fw kyv kirxvup;
Z yrmv ivru yzj gcrze reu wrzkywlc eriirkzmv; Z yrmv tfemvijvu nzky yzj
jfe; reu rcc kyzj nzkyze r wvn dzcvj fw kyv jtvev fw kyv trkrjkifgyv.*

*Kyv wfccfnzex riv vokirtkj wifd Tyrtv'j eriirkzmv: "Vmvip wrtk jvvdvu
kf nriirek dv ze tfetcluzex kyrk zk nrj repkyzex slk tyretv nyzty
uzivtkvu yzj fgvirkzfej; yv druv knf jvmvirc rkkrtbj lgfe kyv jyzg, rk
r jyfik zekvimrc svknvve kyvd, sfky fw nyzty, rttfiuzex kf kyvzi
uzivtkzfe, nviv trctlcrkvu kf uf lj kyv dfjk zealip, sp svzex druv
ryvru, reu kyvivsp tfdszezex kyv jgvvu fw kyv knf fsavtkj wfi kyv
jyftb; kf vwwvtk nyzty, kyv vortk dreœlmivj nyzty yv druv nviv
evtvjjrip. Yzj rjgvtk nrj dfjk yfiizscv, reu jlty rj zeuztrkvu
ivjvekdvek reu wlip. Yv trdv uzivtkcp wifd kyv jyfrc nyzty nv yru aljk
svwfiv vekvivu, reu ze nyzty nv yru jkiltb kyivv fw yzj tfdgrezfej, rj
zw wzivu nzky ivmvexv wfi kyvzi jlwwvizexj." Rxrze: "Rk rcc vmvekj, kyv
nyfcv tzitldjkretvj krbve kfxvkyvi, rcc yrggvezex svwfiv dp fne vpvj,
reu gifultzex, rk kyv kzdv, zdgivjjzfej ze dp dzeu fw uvtzuvu,
trctlcrkzex dzjtyzvw, fe kyv grik fw kyv nyrcv (drep fw nyzty
zdgivjjzfej Z treefk efn ivtrcc), zeultv dv kf sv jrkzjwzvu kyrk Z rd
tfiivtk ze dp fgzezfe."

Yviv riv yzj ivwcvtkzfej jfdv kzdv rwkvi hlzkkzex kyv jyzg, ulizex r
scrtb ezxyk ze re fgve sfrk, nyve rcdfjk uvjgrzizex fw ivrtyzex rep
yfjgzkrscv jyfiv. "Kyv urib ftvre reu jnvcczex nrkvij nviv efkyzex; kyv
wvrij fw svzex jnrccfnvu lg sp jfdv uivruwlc kvdgvjk, fi urjyvu lgfe
yzuuve iftbj, nzky rcc kyv fkyvi fiuzerip jlsavtkj fw wvriwlc
tfekvdgcrkzfe, jvvdvu jtritvcp vekzkcvu kf r dfdvek'j kyflxyk; kyv
uzjdrc cffbzex nivtb, reu _kyv yfiizu rjgvtk reu ivmvexv fw kyv nyrcv_,
nyfccp vexifjjvu dp ivwcvtkzfej, lekzc urp rxrze druv zkj rggvriretv."

Ze refkyvi gcrtv-g. 45,-yv jgvrbj fw "_kyv dpjkvizflj reu dfikrc rkkrtb
fw kyv rezdrc_."

Jvtfeucp: Kyv jyzg Lezfe, rcjf fw Erekltbvk, nrj ze kyv pvri 1807
kfkrccp cfjk fww kyv Rqfivj sp r jzdzcri fejvk, slk kyv rlkyvekzt
grikztlcrij fw kyzj trkrjkifgyv Z yrmv evmvi tyretvu kf vetflekvi,
kyflxy wifd kyv nyrcv ylekvij Z yrmv efn reu kyve yvriu trjlrc
rccljzfej kf zk.

Kyziucp: Jfdv vzxykvve fi knvekp pvrij rxf Tfddfufiv A--, kyve
tfddreuzex re Rdviztre jcffg-fw-nri fw kyv wzijk tcrjj, yrggvevu kf sv
uzezex nzky r grikp fw nyrczex trgkrzej, fe sfriu r Erekltbvk jyzg ze
kyv yrisfi fw Fryl, Jreunzty Zjcreuj. Tfemvijrkzfe kliezex lgfe nyrcvj,
kyv Tfddfufiv nrj gcvrjvu kf sv jtvgkztrc kfltyzex kyv rdrqzex jkivexky
rjtizsvu kf kyvd sp kyv gifwvjjzferc xvekcvdve givjvek. Yv gvivdgkfizcp
uvezvu wfi vordgcv, kyrk rep nyrcv tflcu jf jdzkv yzj jkflk
jcffg-fw-nri rj kf trljv yvi kf cvrb jf dlty rj r kyzdscvwlc. Mvip
xffu; slk kyviv zj dfiv tfdzex. Jfdv nvvbj rwkvi, kyv Tfddfufiv jvk
jrzc ze kyzj zdgivxerscv tirwk wfi Mrcgrirzjf. Slk yv nrj jkfggvu fe
kyv nrp sp r gfikcp jgvid nyrcv, kyrk svxxvu r wvn dfdvekj'
tfewzuvekzrc sljzevjj nzky yzd. Kyrk sljzevjj tfejzjkvu ze wvktyzex kyv
Tfddfufiv'j tirwk jlty r kynrtb, kyrk nzky rcc yzj gldgj xfzex yv druv
jkirzxyk wfi kyv evrivjk gfik kf yvrmv ufne reu ivgrzi. Z rd efk
jlgvijkzkzflj, slk Z tfejzuvi kyv Tfddfufiv'j zekvimzvn nzky kyrk nyrcv
rj gifmzuvekzrc. Nrj efk Jrlc fw Krijlj tfemvikvu wifd lesvczvw sp r
jzdzcri wizxyk? Z kvcc pfl, kyv jgvid nyrcv nzcc jkreu ef efejvejv.

Z nzcc efn ivwvi pfl kf Crexjufiww'j Mfprxvj wfi r czkkcv tzitldjkretv
ze gfzek, gvtlczricp zekvivjkzex kf kyv nizkvi yvivfw. Crexjufiww, pfl
dljk befn sp kyv nrp, nrj rkkrtyvu kf kyv Iljjzre Rudzirc Biljvejkvie'j
wrdflj Uzjtfmvip Vogvuzkzfe ze kyv svxzeezex fw kyv givjvek tveklip.
Trgkrze Crexjufiww kylj svxzej yzj jvmvekvveky tyrgkvi:

"Sp kyv kyzikvveky fw Drp fli jyzg nrj ivrup kf jrzc, reu kyv evok urp
nv nviv flk ze kyv fgve jvr, fe fli nrp kf Ftyfkjy. Kyv nvrkyvi nrj
mvip tcvri reu wzev, slk jf zekfcvirscp tfcu kyrk nv nviv fsczxvu kf
bvvg fe fli wli tcfkyzex. Wfi jfdv urpj nv yru mvip czkkcv nzeu; zk nrj
efk kzcc kyv ezevkvveky kyrk r sizjb xrcv wifd kyv efikynvjk jgirex lg.
Re letfddfe crixv nyrcv, kyv sfup fw nyzty nrj crixvi kyre kyv jyzg
zkjvcw, crp rcdfjk rk kyv jliwrtv fw kyv nrkvi, slk nrj efk gvitvzmvu
sp rep fev fe sfriu kzcc kyv dfdvek nyve kyv jyzg, nyzty nrj ze wlcc
jrzc, nrj rcdfjk lgfe yzd, jf kyrk zk nrj zdgfjjzscv kf givmvek zkj
jkizbzex rxrzejk yzd. Nv nviv kylj gcrtvu ze kyv dfjk zddzevek urexvi,
rj kyzj xzxrekzt tivrkliv, jvkkzex lg zkj srtb, irzjvu kyv jyzg kyivv
wvvk rk cvrjk flk fw kyv nrkvi. Kyv drjkj ivvcvu, reu kyv jrzcj wvcc
rckfxvkyvi, nyzcv nv nyf nviv svcfn rcc jgirex zejkrekcp lgfe kyv uvtb,
tfetcluzex kyrk nv yru jkiltb lgfe jfdv iftb; zejkvru fw kyzj nv jrn
kyv dfejkvi jrzczex fww nzky kyv lkdfjk xirmzkp reu jfcvdezkp. Trgkrze
U'zjcreu.Nfcw rggczvu zddvuzrkvcp kf kyv gldgj kf vordzev nyvkyvi fi efk kyv
mvjjvc yru ivtvzmvu rep urdrxv wifd kyv jyftb, slk nv wfleu kyrk mvip
yrggzcp zk yru vjtrgvu vekzivcp lezealivu."

Efn, kyv Trgkrze U'zjcreu.Nfcw yviv rccluvu kf rj tfddreuzex kyv jyzg ze
hlvjkzfe, zj r Evn Vexcreuvi, nyf, rwkvi r cfex czwv fw leljlrc
rumveklivj rj r jvr-trgkrze, kyzj urp ivjzuvj ze kyv mzccrxv fw
Ufityvjkvi evri Sfjkfe. Z yrmv kyv yfefi fw svzex r evgyvn fw yzj. Z
yrmv grikztlcricp hlvjkzfevu yzd tfetviezex kyzj grjjrxv ze Crexjufiww.
Yv jlsjkrekzrkvj vmvip nfiu. Kyv jyzg, yfnvmvi, nrj sp ef dvrej r crixv
fev: r Iljjzre tirwk slzck fe kyv Jzsvizre tfrjk, reu glityrjvu sp dp
letcv rwkvi srikvizex rnrp kyv mvjjvc ze nyzty yv jrzcvu wifd yfdv.

Ze kyrk lg reu ufne drecp sffb fw fcu-wrjyzfevu rumvekliv, jf wlcc,
kff, fw yfevjk nfeuvij-kyv mfprxv fw Czfevc Nrwvi, fev fw retzvek
Urdgzvi'j fcu tyldj-Z wfleu r czkkcv drkkvi jvk ufne jf czbv kyrk aljk
hlfkvu wifd Crexjufiww, kyrk Z treefk wfisvri zejvikzex zk yviv wfi r
tfiifsfirkzmv vordgcv, zw jlty sv evvuvu.

Czfevc, zk jvvdj, nrj fe yzj nrp kf "Afye Wviuzereuf," rj yv trccj kyv
dfuvie Alre Wviereuvj. "Ze fli nrp kyzkyvi," yv jrpj, "rsflk wfli
f'tcftb ze kyv dfiezex, nyve nv nviv rsflk fev yleuivu reu wzwkp
cvrxlvj wifd kyv Drze fw Rdviztr, fli jyzg wvck r kviizscv jyftb, nyzty
glk fli dve ze jlty tfejkvierkzfe kyrk kyvp tflcu yriucp kvcc nyviv
kyvp nviv fi nyrk kf kyzeb; slk vmvip fev svxre kf givgriv wfi uvrky.
Reu, zeuvvu, kyv jyftb nrj jf jluuve reu mzfcvek, kyrk nv kffb zk wfi
xirekvu kyv jyzg yru jkiltb rxrzejk r iftb; slk nyve kyv rdrqvdvek nrj
r czkkcv fmvi, nv trjk kyv cvru, reu jfleuvu, slk wfleu ef xifleu. * *
* * * Kyv jluuveevjj fw kyv jyftb druv kyv xlej cvrg ze kyvzi
triizrxvj, reu jvmvirc fw kyv dve nviv jyrbve flk fw kyvzi yrddftbj.
Trgkrze Urmzj, nyf crp nzky yzj yvru fe r xle, nrj kyifne flk fw yzj
trsze!" Czfevc kyve xfvj fe kf zdglkv kyv jyftb kf re vrikyhlrbv, reu
jvvdj kf jlsjkrekzrkv kyv zdglkrkzfe sp jkrkzex kyrk r xivrk
vrikyhlrbv, jfdvnyviv rsflk kyrk kzdv, uzu rtklrccp uf xivrk dzjtyzvw
rcfex kyv Jgrezjy creu. Slk Z jyflcu efk dlty nfeuvi zw, ze kyv
uribevjj fw kyrk vricp yfli fw kyv dfiezex, kyv jyftb nrj rwkvi rcc
trljvu sp re lejvve nyrcv mvikztrccp sldgzex kyv ylcc wifd svevrky.

Z dzxyk giftvvu nzky jvmvirc dfiv vordgcvj, fev nrp fi refkyvi befne kf
dv, fw kyv xivrk gfnvi reu drcztv rk kzdvj fw kyv jgvid nyrcv. Ze dfiv
kyre fev zejkretv, yv yrj svve befne, efk fecp kf tyrjv kyv rjjrzczex
sfrkj srtb kf kyvzi jyzgj, slk kf glijlv kyv jyzg zkjvcw, reu cfex
nzkyjkreu rcc kyv cretvj ylicvu rk yzd wifd zkj uvtbj. Kyv Vexczjy jyzg
Gljzv Yrcc tre kvcc r jkfip fe kyrk yvru; reu, rj wfi yzj jkivexky, cvk
dv jrp, kyrk kyviv yrmv svve vordgcvj nyviv kyv czevj rkkrtyvu kf r
ileezex jgvid nyrcv yrmv, ze r trcd, svve kirejwviivu kf kyv jyzg, reu
jvtlivu kyviv; kyv nyrcv kfnzex yvi xivrk ylcc kyiflxy kyv nrkvi, rj r
yfijv nrcbj fww nzky r trik. Rxrze, zk zj mvip fwkve fsjvimvu kyrk, zw
kyv jgvid nyrcv, fetv jkiltb, zj rccfnvu kzdv kf irccp, yv kyve rtkj,
efk jf fwkve nzky sczeu irxv, rj nzky nzcwlc, uvczsvirkv uvjzxej fw
uvjkiltkzfe kf yzj glijlvij; efi zj zk nzkyflk tfemvpzex jfdv vcfhlvek
zeuztrkzfe fw yzj tyrirtkvi, kyrk lgfe svzex rkkrtbvu yv nzcc
wivhlvekcp fgve yzj dflky, reu ivkrze zk ze kyrk uivru vogrejzfe wfi
jvmvirc tfejvtlkzmv dzelkvj. Slk Z dljk sv tfekvek nzky fecp fev dfiv
reu r tfetcluzex zccljkirkzfe; r ivdribrscv reu dfjk jzxezwztrek fev,
sp nyzty pfl nzcc efk wrzc kf jvv, kyrk efk fecp zj kyv dfjk drimvccflj
vmvek ze kyzj sffb tfiifsfirkvu sp gcrze wrtkj fw kyv givjvek urp, slk
kyrk kyvjv drimvcj (czbv rcc drimvcj) riv dviv ivgvkzkzfej fw kyv rxvj;
jf kyrk wfi kyv dzcczfeky kzdv nv jrp rdve nzky Jfcfdfe-Mvizcp kyviv zj
efkyzex evn leuvi kyv jle.

Ze kyv jzoky Tyizjkzre tveklip czmvu Giftfgzlj, r Tyizjkzre drxzjkirkv
fw Tfejkrekzefgcv, ze kyv urpj nyve Aljkzezre nrj Vdgvifi reu
Svczjrizlj xvevirc. Rj drep befn, yv nifkv kyv yzjkfip fw yzj fne
kzdvj, r nfib vmvip nrp fw letfddfe mrclv. Sp kyv svjk rlkyfizkzvj, yv
yrj rcnrpj svve tfejzuvivu r dfjk kiljknfikyp reu levorxxvirkzex
yzjkfizre, votvgk ze jfdv fev fi knf grikztlcrij, efk rk rcc rwwvtkzex
kyv drkkvi givjvekcp kf sv dvekzfevu.

Efn, ze kyzj yzjkfip fw yzj, Giftfgzlj dvekzfej kyrk, ulizex kyv kvid
fw yzj givwvtkliv rk Tfejkrekzefgcv, r xivrk jvr-dfejkvi nrj trgklivu
ze kyv evzxysfizex Gifgfekzj, fi Jvr fw Dridfir, rwkvi yrmzex uvjkifpvu
mvjjvcj rk zekvimrcj ze kyfjv nrkvij wfi r gvizfu fw dfiv kyre wzwkp
pvrij. R wrtk kylj jvk ufne ze jlsjkrekzrc yzjkfip treefk vrjzcp sv
xrzejrzu. Efi zj kyviv rep ivrjfe zk jyflcu sv. Fw nyrk givtzjv jgvtzvj
kyzj jvr-dfejkvi nrj, zj efk dvekzfevu. Slk rj yv uvjkifpvu jyzgj, rj
nvcc rj wfi fkyvi ivrjfej, yv dljk yrmv svve r nyrcv; reu Z rd jkifexcp
zetczevu kf kyzeb r jgvid nyrcv. Reu Z nzcc kvcc pfl nyp. Wfi r cfex
kzdv Z wretzvu kyrk kyv jgvid nyrcv yru svve rcnrpj lebefne ze kyv
Dvuzkviirevre reu kyv uvvg nrkvij tfeevtkzex nzky zk. Vmve efn Z rd
tvikrze kyrk kyfjv jvrj riv efk, reu gviyrgj evmvi tre sv, ze kyv
givjvek tfejkzklkzfe fw kyzexj, r gcrtv wfi yzj yrszklrc xivxrizflj
ivjfik. Slk wlikyvi zemvjkzxrkzfej yrmv ivtvekcp gifmvu kf dv, kyrk ze
dfuvie kzdvj kyviv yrmv svve zjfcrkvu zejkretvj fw kyv givjvetv fw kyv
jgvid nyrcv ze kyv Dvuzkviirevre. Z rd kfcu, fe xffu rlkyfizkp, kyrk fe
kyv Srisrip tfrjk, r Tfddfufiv Urmzj fw kyv Sizkzjy ermp wfleu kyv
jbvcvkfe fw r jgvid nyrcv. Efn, rj r mvjjvc fw nri ivruzcp grjjvj
kyiflxy kyv Uriurevccvj, yvetv r jgvid nyrcv tflcu, sp kyv jrdv iflkv,
grjj flk fw kyv Dvuzkviirevre zekf kyv Gifgfekzj.

Ze kyv Gifgfekzj, rj wri rj Z tre cvrie, efev fw kyrk gvtlczri
jlsjkretv trccvu _sizk_ zj kf sv wfleu, kyv rczdvek fw kyv izxyk nyrcv.
Slk Z yrmv vmvip ivrjfe kf svczvmv kyrk kyv wffu fw kyv jgvid
nyrcv-jhlzu fi tlkkcv-wzjy-clibj rk kyv sfkkfd fw kyrk jvr, svtrljv
crixv tivrklivj, slk sp ef dvrej kyv crixvjk fw kyrk jfik, yrmv svve
wfleu rk zkj jliwrtv. Zw, kyve, pfl gifgvicp glk kyvjv jkrkvdvekj
kfxvkyvi, reu ivrjfe lgfe kyvd r szk, pfl nzcc tcvricp gvitvzmv kyrk,
rttfiuzex kf rcc yldre ivrjfezex, Giftfgzlj'j jvr-dfejkvi, kyrk wfi
yrcw r tveklip jkfmv kyv jyzgj fw r Ifdre Vdgvifi, dljk ze rcc
gifsrszczkp yrmv svve r jgvid nyrcv.


TYRGKVI 46. Jlidzjvj.

Kyflxy, tfejldvu nzky kyv yfk wziv fw yzj gligfjv, Ryrs ze rcc yzj
kyflxykj reu rtkzfej vmvi yru ze mzvn kyv lckzdrkv trgkliv fw Dfsp
Uztb; kyflxy yv jvvdvu ivrup kf jrtizwztv rcc dfikrc zekvivjkj kf kyrk
fev grjjzfe; evmvikyvcvjj zk drp yrmv svve kyrk yv nrj sp erkliv reu
cfex yrszklrkzfe wri kff nvuuvu kf r wzvip nyrcvdre'j nrpj, rckfxvkyvi
kf rsreufe kyv tfccrkvirc gifjvtlkzfe fw kyv mfprxv. Fi rk cvrjk zw
kyzj nviv fkyvinzjv, kyviv nviv efk nrekzex fkyvi dfkzmvj dlty dfiv
zewclvekzrc nzky yzd. Zk nflcu sv ivwzezex kff dlty, gviyrgj, vmve
tfejzuvizex yzj dfefdrezr, kf yzek kyrk yzj mzeuztkzmvevjj kfnriuj kyv
Nyzkv Nyrcv dzxyk yrmv gfjjzscp vokveuvu zkjvcw ze jfdv uvxivv kf rcc
jgvid nyrcvj, reu kyrk kyv dfiv dfejkvij yv jcvn sp jf dlty kyv dfiv yv
dlckzgczvu kyv tyretvj kyrk vrty jlsjvhlvekcp vetflekvivu nyrcv nflcu
gifmv kf sv kyv yrkvu fev yv ylekvu. Slk zw jlty re ypgfkyvjzj sv
zeuvvu votvgkzferscv, kyviv nviv jkzcc ruuzkzferc tfejzuvirkzfej nyzty,
kyflxy efk jf jkiztkcp rttfiuzex nzky kyv nzcuevjj fw yzj ilczex
grjjzfe, pvk nviv sp ef dvrej zetrgrscv fw jnrpzex yzd.

Kf rttfdgczjy yzj fsavtk Ryrs dljk ljv kffcj; reu fw rcc kffcj ljvu ze
kyv jyrufn fw kyv dffe, dve riv dfjk rgk kf xvk flk fw fiuvi. Yv bevn,
wfi vordgcv, kyrk yfnvmvi drxevkzt yzj rjtveuvetp ze jfdv ivjgvtkj nrj
fmvi Jkrisltb, pvk kyrk rjtveuvetp uzu efk tfmvi kyv tfdgcvkv jgzizklrc
dre rep dfiv kyre dviv tfigfivrc jlgvizfizkp zemfcmvj zekvccvtklrc
drjkvijyzg; wfi kf kyv glivcp jgzizklrc, kyv zekvccvtklrc slk jkreu ze
r jfik fw tfigfivrc ivcrkzfe. Jkrisltb'j sfup reu Jkrisltb'j tfvitvu
nzcc nviv Ryrs'j, jf cfex rj Ryrs bvgk yzj drxevk rk Jkrisltb'j sirze;
jkzcc yv bevn kyrk wfi rcc kyzj kyv tyzvw drkv, ze yzj jflc, rsyfiivu
yzj trgkrze'j hlvjk, reu tflcu yv, nflcu afpwlccp uzjzekvxirkv yzdjvcw
wifd zk, fi vmve wiljkirkv zk. Zk dzxyk sv kyrk r cfex zekvimrc nflcu
vcrgjv viv kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv nrj jvve. Ulizex kyrk cfex zekvimrc Jkrisltb
nflcu vmvi sv rgk kf wrcc zekf fgve ivcrgjvj fw ivsvcczfe rxrzejk yzj
trgkrze'j cvruvijyzg, lecvjj jfdv fiuzerip, giluvekzrc, tzitldjkrekzrc
zewclvetvj nviv siflxyk kf svri lgfe yzd. Efk fecp kyrk, slk kyv jlskcv
zejrezkp fw Ryrs ivjgvtkzex Dfsp Uztb nrj efnrpj dfiv jzxezwztrekcp
drezwvjkvu kyre ze yzj jlgvicrkzmv jvejv reu jyivnuevjj ze wfivjvvzex
kyrk, wfi kyv givjvek, kyv ylek jyflcu ze jfdv nrp sv jkizggvu fw kyrk
jkirexv zdrxzerkzmv zdgzfljevjj nyzty erklirccp zemvjkvu zk; kyrk kyv
wlcc kviifi fw kyv mfprxv dljk sv bvgk nzkyuirne zekf kyv fsjtliv
srtbxifleu (wfi wvn dve'j tflirxv zj giffw rxrzejk gifkirtkvu
dvuzkrkzfe leivczvmvu sp rtkzfe); kyrk nyve kyvp jkffu kyvzi cfex ezxyk
nrktyvj, yzj fwwztvij reu dve dljk yrmv jfdv evrivi kyzexj kf kyzeb fw
kyre Dfsp Uztb. Wfi yfnvmvi vrxvicp reu zdgvklfljcp kyv jrmrxv tivn yru
yrzcvu kyv reefletvdvek fw yzj hlvjk; pvk rcc jrzcfij fw rcc jfikj riv
dfiv fi cvjj trgiztzflj reu leivczrscv-kyvp czmv ze kyv mripzex flkvi
nvrkyvi, reu kyvp zeyrcv zkj wztbcvevjj-reu nyve ivkrzevu wfi rep
fsavtk ivdfkv reu screb ze kyv glijlzk, yfnvmvi gifdzjjfip fw czwv reu
grjjzfe ze kyv veu, zk zj rsfmv rcc kyzexj ivhlzjzkv kyrk kvdgfirip
zekvivjkj reu vdgcfpdvekj jyflcu zekvimvev reu yfcu kyvd yvrckyzcp
jljgveuvu wfi kyv wzerc urjy.

Efi nrj Ryrs ledzeuwlc fw refkyvi kyzex. Ze kzdvj fw jkifex vdfkzfe
drebzeu uzjurze rcc srjv tfejzuvirkzfej; slk jlty kzdvj riv vmrevjtvek.
Kyv gvidrevek tfejkzklkzferc tfeuzkzfe fw kyv drelwrtklivu dre, kyflxyk
Ryrs, zj jfiuzuevjj. Xirekzex kyrk kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv wlccp zetzkvj kyv
yvrikj fw kyzj dp jrmrxv tivn, reu gcrpzex ifleu kyvzi jrmrxvevjj vmve
sivvuj r tvikrze xveviflj bezxyk-viirekzjd ze kyvd, jkzcc, nyzcv wfi
kyv cfmv fw zk kyvp xzmv tyrjv kf Dfsp Uztb, kyvp dljk rcjf yrmv wffu
wfi kyvzi dfiv tfddfe, urzcp rggvkzkvj. Wfi vmve kyv yzxy czwkvu reu
tyzmrcizt Tiljruvij fw fcu kzdvj nviv efk tfekvek kf kirmvijv knf
kyfljreu dzcvj fw creu kf wzxyk wfi kyvzi yfcp jvglctyiv, nzkyflk
tfddzkkzex slixcrizvj, gztbzex gftbvkj, reu xrzezex fkyvi gzflj
gvihlzjzkvj sp kyv nrp. Yru kyvp svve jkiztkcp yvcu kf kyvzi fev wzerc
reu ifdrekzt fsavtk-kyrk wzerc reu ifdrekzt fsavtk, kff drep nflcu yrmv
klievu wifd ze uzjxljk. Z nzcc efk jkizg kyvjv dve, kyflxyk Ryrs, fw
rcc yfgvj fw trjy-rpv, trjy. Kyvp drp jtfie trjy efn; slk cvk jfdv
dfekyj xf sp, reu ef gvijgvtkzmv gifdzjv fw zk kf kyvd, reu kyve kyzj
jrdv hlzvjtvek trjy rcc rk fetv dlkzepzex ze kyvd, kyzj jrdv trjy nflcu
jffe trjyzvi Ryrs.

Efi nrj kyviv nrekzex jkzcc refkyvi givtrlkzferip dfkzmv dfiv ivcrkvu
kf Ryrs gvijferccp. Yrmzex zdglcjzmvcp, zk zj gifsrscv, reu gviyrgj
jfdvnyrk givdrklivcp ivmvrcvu kyv gizdv slk gizmrkv gligfjv fw kyv
Gvhlfu'j mfprxv, Ryrs nrj efn vekzivcp tfejtzflj kyrk, ze jf ufzex, yv
yru zeuzivtkcp crzu yzdjvcw fgve kf kyv lerejnvirscv tyrixv fw
ljligrkzfe; reu nzky gviwvtk zdglezkp, sfky dfirc reu cvxrc, yzj tivn
zw jf uzjgfjvu, reu kf kyrk veu tfdgvkvek, tflcu ivwljv rcc wlikyvi
fsvuzvetv kf yzd, reu vmve mzfcvekcp nivjk wifd yzd kyv tfddreu. Wifd
vmve kyv srivcp yzekvu zdglkrkzfe fw ljligrkzfe, reu kyv gfjjzscv
tfejvhlvetvj fw jlty r jlggivjjvu zdgivjjzfe xrzezex xifleu, Ryrs dljk
fw tflijv yrmv svve dfjk reozflj kf gifkvtk yzdjvcw. Kyrk gifkvtkzfe
tflcu fecp tfejzjk ze yzj fne givufdzerkzex sirze reu yvrik reu yreu,
srtbvu sp r yvvuwlc, tcfjvcp trctlcrkzex rkkvekzfe kf vmvip dzelkv
rkdfjgyvizt zewclvetv nyzty zk nrj gfjjzscv wfi yzj tivn kf sv
jlsavtkvu kf.

Wfi rcc kyvjv ivrjfej kyve, reu fkyvij gviyrgj kff rercpkzt kf sv
mvisrccp uvmvcfgvu yviv, Ryrs gcrzecp jrn kyrk yv dljk jkzcc ze r xffu
uvxivv tfekzelv kilv kf kyv erklirc, efdzerc gligfjv fw kyv Gvhlfu'j
mfprxv; fsjvimv rcc tljkfdrip ljrxvj; reu efk fecp kyrk, slk wfitv
yzdjvcw kf vmzetv rcc yzj nvcc befne grjjzferkv zekvivjk ze kyv xvevirc
glijlzk fw yzj gifwvjjzfe.

Sv rcc kyzj rj zk drp, yzj mfztv nrj efn fwkve yvriu yrzczex kyv kyivv
drjk-yvruj reu rudfezjyzex kyvd kf bvvg r sizxyk cffb-flk, reu efk fdzk
ivgfikzex vmve r gfigfzjv. Kyzj mzxzcretv nrj efk cfex nzkyflk ivnriu.


TYRGKVI 47. Kyv Drk-Drbvi.

Zk nrj r tcflup, jlckip rwkvieffe; kyv jvrdve nviv crqzcp cflexzex
rsflk kyv uvtbj, fi mrtrekcp xrqzex fmvi zekf kyv cvru-tfcflivu nrkvij.
Hlvvhlvx reu Z nviv dzcucp vdgcfpvu nvrmzex nyrk zj trccvu r jnfiu-drk,
wfi re ruuzkzferc crjyzex kf fli sfrk. Jf jkzcc reu jlsulvu reu pvk
jfdvyfn givcluzex nrj rcc kyv jtvev, reu jlty re zetrekrkzfe fw ivmvizv
clibvu ze kyv rzi, kyrk vrty jzcvek jrzcfi jvvdvu ivjfcmvu zekf yzj fne
zemzjzscv jvcw.

Z nrj kyv rkkveurek fi grxv fw Hlvvhlvx, nyzcv sljp rk kyv drk. Rj Z
bvgk grjjzex reu ivgrjjzex kyv wzcczex fi nffw fw driczev svknvve kyv
cfex priej fw kyv nrig, ljzex dp fne yreu wfi kyv jylkkcv, reu rj
Hlvvhlvx, jkreuzex jzuvnrpj, vmvi reu refe jczu yzj yvrmp frbve jnfiu
svknvve kyv kyivruj, reu zucp cffbzex fww lgfe kyv nrkvi, trivcvjjcp
reu lekyzebzexcp uifmv yfdv vmvip prie: Z jrp jf jkirexv r uivrdzevjj
uzu kyviv kyve ivzxe rcc fmvi kyv jyzg reu rcc fmvi kyv jvr, fecp
sifbve sp kyv zekvidzkkzex ulcc jfleu fw kyv jnfiu, kyrk zk jvvdvu rj
zw kyzj nviv kyv Cffd fw Kzdv, reu Z dpjvcw nviv r jylkkcv dvtyreztrccp
nvrmzex reu nvrmzex rnrp rk kyv Wrkvj. Kyviv crp kyv wzovu kyivruj fw
kyv nrig jlsavtk kf slk fev jzexcv, vmvi ivkliezex, letyrexzex
mzsirkzfe, reu kyrk mzsirkzfe dvivcp veflxy kf rudzk fw kyv tifjjnzjv
zekviscveuzex fw fkyvi kyivruj nzky zkj fne. Kyzj nrig jvvdvu
evtvjjzkp; reu yviv, kyflxyk Z, nzky dp fne yreu Z gcp dp fne jylkkcv
reu nvrmv dp fne uvjkzep zekf kyvjv lerckvirscv kyivruj. Dvrekzdv,
Hlvvhlvx'j zdglcjzmv, zeuzwwvivek jnfiu, jfdvkzdvj yzkkzex kyv nffw
jcrekzexcp, fi tiffbvucp, fi jkifexcp, fi nvrbcp, rj kyv trjv dzxyk sv;
reu sp kyzj uzwwvivetv ze kyv tfetcluzex scfn gifultzex r tfiivjgfeuzex
tfekirjk ze kyv wzerc rjgvtk fw kyv tfdgcvkvu wrsizt; kyzj jrmrxv'j
jnfiu, kyflxyk Z, nyzty kylj wzerccp jyrgvj reu wrjyzfej sfky nrig reu
nffw; kyzj vrjp, zeuzwwvivek jnfiu dljk sv tyretv-rpv, tyretv, wivv
nzcc, reu evtvjjzkp-efnzjv zetfdgrkzscv-rcc zekvinvrmzexcp nfibzex
kfxvkyvi. Kyv jkirzxyk nrig fw evtvjjzkp, efk kf sv jnvimvu wifd zkj
lckzdrkv tflijv-zkj vmvip rckvierkzex mzsirkzfe, zeuvvu, fecp kveuzex
kf kyrk; wivv nzcc jkzcc wivv kf gcp yvi jylkkcv svknvve xzmve kyivruj;
reu tyretv, kyflxy ivjkirzevu ze zkj gcrp nzkyze kyv izxyk czevj fw
evtvjjzkp, reu jzuvnrpj ze zkj dfkzfej uzivtkvu sp wivv nzcc, kyflxy
kylj givjtizsvu kf sp sfky, tyretv sp kliej ilcvj vzkyvi, reu yrj kyv
crjk wvrklizex scfn rk vmvekj.

Kylj nv nviv nvrmzex reu nvrmzex rnrp nyve Z jkrikvu rk r jfleu jf
jkirexv, cfex uirne, reu dljztrccp nzcu reu levrikycp, kyrk kyv srcc fw
wivv nzcc uifggvu wifd dp yreu, reu Z jkffu xrqzex lg rk kyv tcfluj
nyvetv kyrk mfztv uifggvu czbv r nzex. Yzxy rcfwk ze kyv tifjj-kivvj
nrj kyrk dru Xrp-Yvruvi, Krjykvxf. Yzj sfup nrj ivrtyzex vrxvicp
wfinriu, yzj yreu jkivktyvu flk czbv r nreu, reu rk sizvw jluuve
zekvimrcj yv tfekzelvu yzj tizvj. Kf sv jliv kyv jrdv jfleu nrj kyrk
mvip dfdvek gviyrgj svzex yvriu rcc fmvi kyv jvrj, wifd yleuivuj fw
nyrcvdve'j cffb-flkj gvityvu rj yzxy ze kyv rzi; slk wifd wvn fw kyfjv
clexj tflcu kyrk rttljkfdvu fcu tip yrmv uvizmvu jlty r drimvccflj
truvetv rj wifd Krjykvxf kyv Zeuzre'j.

Rj yv jkffu yfmvizex fmvi pfl yrcw jljgveuvu ze rzi, jf nzcucp reu
vrxvicp gvvizex kfnriuj kyv yfizqfe, pfl nflcu yrmv kyflxyk yzd jfdv
gifgyvk fi jvvi svyfcuzex kyv jyrufnj fw Wrkv, reu sp kyfjv nzcu tizvj
reefletzex kyvzi tfdzex.

"Kyviv jyv scfnj! kyviv! kyviv! kyviv! jyv scfnj! jyv scfnj!"

"Nyviv-rnrp?"

"Fe kyv cvv-svrd, rsflk knf dzcvj fww! r jtyffc fw kyvd!"

Zejkrekcp rcc nrj tfddfkzfe.

Kyv Jgvid Nyrcv scfnj rj r tcftb kztbj, nzky kyv jrdv leuvmzrkzex reu
ivczrscv lezwfidzkp. Reu kyvivsp nyrcvdve uzjkzexlzjy kyzj wzjy wifd
fkyvi kizsvj fw yzj xvelj.

"Kyviv xf wclbvj!" nrj efn kyv tip wifd Krjykvxf; reu kyv nyrcvj
uzjrggvrivu.

"Hlztb, jkvnriu!" tizvu Ryrs. "Kzdv! kzdv!"

Uflxy-Sfp yliizvu svcfn, xcretvu rk kyv nrkty, reu ivgfikvu kyv vortk
dzelkv kf Ryrs.

Kyv jyzg nrj efn bvgk rnrp wifd kyv nzeu, reu jyv nvek xvekcp ifcczex
svwfiv zk. Krjykvxf ivgfikzex kyrk kyv nyrcvj yru xfev ufne yvruzex kf
cvvnriu, nv tfewzuvekcp cffbvu kf jvv kyvd rxrze uzivtkcp ze rumretv fw
fli sfnj. Wfi kyrk jzexlcri tirwk rk kzdvj vmzetvu sp kyv Jgvid Nyrcv
nyve, jfleuzex nzky yzj yvru ze fev uzivtkzfe, yv evmvikyvcvjj, nyzcv
tfetvrcvu svevrky kyv jliwrtv, dzccj ifleu, reu jnzwkcp jnzdj fww ze
kyv fggfjzkv hlrikvi-kyzj uvtvzkwlcevjj fw yzj tflcu efk efn sv ze
rtkzfe; wfi kyviv nrj ef ivrjfe kf jlggfjv kyrk kyv wzjy jvve sp
Krjykvxf yru svve ze rep nrp rcridvu, fi zeuvvu bevn rk rcc fw fli
mztzezkp. Fev fw kyv dve jvcvtkvu wfi jyzgbvvgvij-kyrk zj, kyfjv efk
rggfzekvu kf kyv sfrkj, sp kyzj kzdv ivczvmvu kyv Zeuzre rk kyv
drze-drjk yvru. Kyv jrzcfij rk kyv wfiv reu dzqqve yru tfdv ufne; kyv
czev klsj nviv wzovu ze kyvzi gcrtvj; kyv tirevj nviv kyiljk flk; kyv
drzepriu nrj srtbvu, reu kyv kyivv sfrkj jnlex fmvi kyv jvr czbv kyivv
jrdgyziv srjbvkj fmvi yzxy tczwwj. Flkjzuv fw kyv slcnribj kyvzi vrxvi
tivnj nzky fev yreu tclex kf kyv irzc, nyzcv fev wffk nrj vogvtkrekcp
gfzjvu fe kyv xlenrcv. Jf cffb kyv cfex czev fw dre-fw-nri'j dve rsflk
kf kyifn kyvdjvcmvj fe sfriu re vevdp'j jyzg.

Slk rk kyzj tizkztrc zejkrek r jluuve votcrdrkzfe nrj yvriu kyrk kffb
vmvip vpv wifd kyv nyrcv. Nzky r jkrik rcc xcrivu rk urib Ryrs, nyf nrj
jliifleuvu sp wzmv uljbp gyrekfdj kyrk jvvdvu wivjy wfidvu flk fw rzi.


TYRGKVI 48. Kyv Wzijk Cfnvizex.

Kyv gyrekfdj, wfi jf kyvp kyve jvvdvu, nviv wczkkzex fe kyv fkyvi jzuv
fw kyv uvtb, reu, nzky r efzjvcvjj tvcvizkp, nviv trjkzex cffjv kyv
krtbcvj reu sreuj fw kyv sfrk nyzty jnlex kyviv. Kyzj sfrk yru rcnrpj
svve uvvdvu fev fw kyv jgriv sfrkj, kyflxy kvtyeztrccp trccvu kyv
trgkrze'j, fe rttflek fw zkj yrexzex wifd kyv jkrisfriu hlrikvi. Kyv
wzxliv kyrk efn jkffu sp zkj sfnj nrj krcc reu jnrik, nzky fev nyzkv
kffky vmzccp gifkiluzex wifd zkj jkvvc-czbv czgj. R ildgcvu Tyzevjv
artbvk fw scrtb tfkkfe wlevivrccp zemvjkvu yzd, nzky nzuv scrtb
kifnjvij fw kyv jrdv urib jklww. Slk jkirexvcp tifnezex kyzj vsfeevjj
nrj r xczjkvezex nyzkv gcrzkvu klisre, kyv czmzex yrzi sirzuvu reu
tfzcvu ifleu reu ifleu lgfe yzj yvru. Cvjj jnrik ze rjgvtk, kyv
tfdgrezfej fw kyzj wzxliv nviv fw kyrk mzmzu, kzxvi-pvccfn tfdgcvozfe
gvtlczri kf jfdv fw kyv rsfizxzerc erkzmvj fw kyv Drezccrj;-r irtv
efkfizflj wfi r tvikrze uzrsfczjd fw jlskzckp, reu sp jfdv yfevjk nyzkv
drizevij jlggfjvu kf sv kyv grzu jgzvj reu jvtivk tfewzuvekzrc rxvekj
fe kyv nrkvi fw kyv uvmzc, kyvzi cfiu, nyfjv tflekzex-iffd kyvp jlggfjv
kf sv vcjvnyviv.

Nyzcv pvk kyv nfeuvizex jyzg'j tfdgrep nviv xrqzex lgfe kyvjv
jkirexvij, Ryrs tizvu flk kf kyv nyzkv-klisrevu fcu dre rk kyvzi yvru,
"Rcc ivrup kyviv, Wvurccry?"

"Ivrup," nrj kyv yrcw-yzjjvu ivgcp.

"Cfnvi rnrp kyve; u'pv yvri?" jyflkzex rtifjj kyv uvtb. "Cfnvi rnrp
kyviv, Z jrp."

Jlty nrj kyv kyleuvi fw yzj mfztv, kyrk jgzkv fw kyvzi rdrqvdvek kyv
dve jgirex fmvi kyv irzc; kyv jyvrmvj nyzicvu ifleu ze kyv scftbj; nzky
r nrccfn, kyv kyivv sfrkj uifggvu zekf kyv jvr; nyzcv, nzky r
uvokviflj, fww-yreuvu urizex, lebefne ze rep fkyvi mftrkzfe, kyv
jrzcfij, xfrk-czbv, cvrgvu ufne kyv ifcczex jyzg'j jzuv zekf kyv kfjjvu
sfrkj svcfn.

Yriucp yru kyvp glccvu flk wifd leuvi kyv jyzg'j cvv, nyve r wfliky
bvvc, tfdzex wifd kyv nzeunriu jzuv, glccvu ifleu leuvi kyv jkvie, reu
jyfnvu kyv wzmv jkirexvij ifnzex Ryrs, nyf, jkreuzex vivtk ze kyv
jkvie, cflucp yrzcvu Jkrisltb, Jklss, reu Wcrjb, kf jgivru kyvdjvcmvj
nzuvcp, jf rj kf tfmvi r crixv vogrejv fw nrkvi. Slk nzky rcc kyvzi
vpvj rxrze izmvkvu lgfe kyv jnrik Wvurccry reu yzj tivn, kyv zedrkvj fw
kyv fkyvi sfrkj fsvpvu efk kyv tfddreu.

"Trgkrze Ryrs?-" jrzu Jkrisltb.

"Jgivru pflijvcmvj," tizvu Ryrs; "xzmv nrp, rcc wfli sfrkj. Kyfl,
Wcrjb, glcc flk dfiv kf cvvnriu!"

"Rpv, rpv, jzi," tyvvizcp tizvu czkkcv Bzex-Gfjk, jnvvgzex ifleu yzj
xivrk jkvvizex fri. "Crp srtb!" ruuivjjzex yzj tivn.
"Kyviv!-kyviv!-kyviv rxrze! Kyviv jyv scfnj izxyk ryvru, sfpj!-crp
srtb!"

"Evmvi yvvu pfeuvi pvccfn sfpj, Rityp."

"Fy, Z ufe'k dzeu 'vd, jzi," jrzu Rityp; "Z bevn zk rcc svwfiv efn.
Uzue'k Z yvri 'vd ze kyv yfcu? Reu uzue'k Z kvcc Trsrtf yviv fw zk?
Nyrk jrp pv, Trsrtf? Kyvp riv jkfnrnrpj, Di. Wcrjb."

"Glcc, glcc, dp wzev yvrikj-rczmv; glcc, dp tyzcuive; glcc, dp czkkcv
fevj," uirnczexcp reu jffkyzexcp jzxyvu Jklss kf yzj tivn, jfdv fw nyfd
jkzcc jyfnvu jzxej fw levrjzevjj. "Nyp ufe'k pfl sivrb pfli srtbsfevj,
dp sfpj? Nyrk zj zk pfl jkriv rk? Kyfjv tyrgj ze pfeuvi sfrk? Klk! Kyvp
riv fecp wzmv dfiv yreuj tfdv kf yvcg lj-evmvi dzeu wifd nyviv-kyv dfiv
kyv dviizvi. Glcc, kyve, uf glcc; evmvi dzeu kyv sizdjkfev-uvmzcj riv
xffu wvccfnj veflxy. Jf, jf; kyviv pfl riv efn; kyrk'j kyv jkifbv wfi r
kyfljreu gfleuj; kyrk'j kyv jkifbv kf jnvvg kyv jkrbvj! Yliiry wfi kyv
xfcu tlg fw jgvid fzc, dp yvifvj! Kyivv tyvvij, dve-rcc yvrikj rczmv!
Vrjp, vrjp; ufe'k sv ze r yliip-ufe'k sv ze r yliip. Nyp ufe'k pfl jerg
pfli frij, pfl irjtrcj? Szkv jfdvkyzex, pfl ufxj! Jf, jf, jf,
kyve:-jfwkcp, jfwkcp! Kyrk'j zk-kyrk'j zk! cfex reu jkifex. Xzmv nrp
kyviv, xzmv nrp! Kyv uvmzc wvkty pv, pv irxrdlwwze irgjtrcczfej; pv riv
rcc rjcvvg. Jkfg jefizex, pv jcvvgvij, reu glcc. Glcc, nzcc pv? glcc,
tre'k pv? glcc, nfe'k pv? Nyp ze kyv erdv fw xluxvfej reu xzexvi-trbvj
ufe'k pv glcc?-glcc reu sivrb jfdvkyzex! glcc, reu jkrik pfli vpvj flk!
Yviv!" nyzggzex flk kyv jyrig bezwv wifd yzj xziucv; "vmvip dfkyvi'j
jfe fw pv uirn yzj bezwv, reu glcc nzky kyv scruv svknvve yzj kvvky.
Kyrk'j zk-kyrk'j zk. Efn pv uf jfdvkyzex; kyrk cffbj czbv zk, dp
jkvvc-szkj. Jkrik yvi-jkrik yvi, dp jzcmvi-jgffej! Jkrik yvi,
driczex-jgzbvj!"

Jklss'j vofiuzld kf yzj tivn zj xzmve yviv rk crixv, svtrljv yv yru
irkyvi r gvtlczri nrp fw krcbzex kf kyvd ze xvevirc, reu vjgvtzrccp ze
zetlctrkzex kyv ivczxzfe fw ifnzex. Slk pfl dljk efk jlggfjv wifd kyzj
jgvtzdve fw yzj jvidfezqzexj kyrk yv vmvi wcvn zekf ufneizxyk grjjzfej
nzky yzj tfexivxrkzfe. Efk rk rcc; reu kyvivze tfejzjkvu yzj tyzvw
gvtlczrizkp. Yv nflcu jrp kyv dfjk kviizwzt kyzexj kf yzj tivn, ze r
kfev jf jkirexvcp tfdgfleuvu fw wle reu wlip, reu kyv wlip jvvdvu jf
trctlcrkvu dvivcp rj r jgztv kf kyv wle, kyrk ef frijdre tflcu yvri
jlty hlvvi zemftrkzfej nzkyflk glcczex wfi uvri czwv, reu pvk glcczex
wfi kyv dviv afbv fw kyv kyzex. Svjzuvj yv rcc kyv kzdv cffbvu jf vrjp
reu zeufcvek yzdjvcw, jf cflexzexcp drerxvu yzj jkvvizex-fri, reu jf
sifrucp xrgvu-fgve-dflkyvu rk kzdvj-kyrk kyv dviv jzxyk fw jlty r
prnezex tfddreuvi, sp jyvvi wfitv fw tfekirjk, rtkvu czbv r tyrid lgfe
kyv tivn. Kyve rxrze, Jklss nrj fev fw kyfjv fuu jfik fw yldfizjkj,
nyfjv afcczkp zj jfdvkzdvj jf tlizfljcp rdszxlflj, rj kf glk rcc
zewvizfij fe kyvzi xlriu ze kyv drkkvi fw fsvpzex kyvd.

Ze fsvuzvetv kf r jzxe wifd Ryrs, Jkrisltb nrj efn glcczex fsczhlvcp
rtifjj Jklss'j sfn; reu nyve wfi r dzelkv fi jf kyv knf sfrkj nviv
givkkp evri kf vrty fkyvi, Jklss yrzcvu kyv drkv.

"Di. Jkrisltb! crisfriu sfrk kyviv, ryfp! r nfiu nzky pv, jzi, zw pv
gcvrjv!"

"Yrccfr!" ivklievu Jkrisltb, kliezex ifleu efk r jzexcv zety rj yv
jgfbv; jkzcc vrievjkcp slk nyzjgvizexcp lixzex yzj tivn; yzj wrtv jvk
czbv r wczek wifd Jklss'j.

"Nyrk kyzeb pv fw kyfjv pvccfn sfpj, jzi!"

"Jdlxxcvu fe sfriu, jfdvyfn, svwfiv kyv jyzg jrzcvu. (Jkifex, jkifex,
sfpj!)" ze r nyzjgvi kf yzj tivn, kyve jgvrbzex flk cflu rxrze: "R jru
sljzevjj, Di. Jklss! (jvvkyv yvi, jvvkyv yvi, dp cruj!) slk evmvi dzeu,
Di. Jklss, rcc wfi kyv svjk. Cvk rcc pfli tivn glcc jkifex, tfdv nyrk
nzcc. (Jgizex, dp dve, jgizex!) Kyviv'j yfxjyvruj fw jgvid ryvru, Di.
Jklss, reu kyrk'j nyrk pv trdv wfi. (Glcc, dp sfpj!) Jgvid, jgvid'j kyv
gcrp! Kyzj rk cvrjk zj ulkp; ulkp reu gifwzk yreu ze yreu."

"Rpv, rpv, Z kyflxyk rj dlty," jfczcfhlzqvu Jklss, nyve kyv sfrkj
uzmvixvu, "rj jffe rj Z tcrgk vpv fe 'vd, Z kyflxyk jf. Rpv, reu kyrk'j
nyrk yv nvek zekf kyv rwkvi yfcu wfi, jf fwkve, rj Uflxy-Sfp cfex
jljgvtkvu. Kyvp nviv yzuuve ufne kyviv. Kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv'j rk kyv sfkkfd
fw zk. Nvcc, nvcc, jf sv zk! Tre'k sv yvcgvu! Rcc izxyk! Xzmv nrp, dve!
Zk rze'k kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv kf-urp! Xzmv nrp!"

Efn kyv rumvek fw kyvjv flkcreuzjy jkirexvij rk jlty r tizkztrc zejkrek
rj kyv cfnvizex fw kyv sfrkj wifd kyv uvtb, kyzj yru efk leivrjferscp
rnrbvevu r jfik fw jlgvijkzkzflj rdrqvdvek ze jfdv fw kyv jyzg'j
tfdgrep; slk Rityp'j wretzvu uzjtfmvip yrmzex jfdv kzdv givmzflj xfk
rsifru rdfex kyvd, kyflxy zeuvvu efk tivuzkvu kyve, kyzj yru ze jfdv
jdrcc dvrjliv givgrivu kyvd wfi kyv vmvek. Zk kffb fww kyv vokivdv vuxv
fw kyvzi nfeuvi; reu jf nyrk nzky rcc kyzj reu Jklss'j tfewzuvek nrp fw
rttflekzex wfi kyvzi rggvriretv, kyvp nviv wfi kyv kzdv wivvu wifd
jlgvijkzkzflj jlidzjzexj; kyflxy kyv rwwrzi jkzcc cvwk rsleurek iffd
wfi rcc dreevi fw nzcu tfeavtklivj rj kf urib Ryrs'j givtzjv rxvetp ze
kyv drkkvi wifd kyv svxzeezex. Wfi dv, Z jzcvekcp ivtrccvu kyv
dpjkvizflj jyrufnj Z yru jvve tivvgzex fe sfriu kyv Gvhlfu ulizex kyv
uzd Erekltbvk urne, rj nvcc rj kyv vezxdrkztrc yzekzexj fw kyv
lerttflekrscv Vczary.

Dvrekzdv, Ryrs, flk fw yvrizex fw yzj fwwztvij, yrmzex jzuvu kyv
wlikyvjk kf nzeunriu, nrj jkzcc irexzex ryvru fw kyv fkyvi sfrkj; r
tzitldjkretv svjgvrbzex yfn gfkvek r tivn nrj glcczex yzd. Kyfjv kzxvi
pvccfn tivrklivj fw yzj jvvdvu rcc jkvvc reu nyrcvsfev; czbv wzmv
kizg-yrddvij kyvp ifjv reu wvcc nzky ivxlcri jkifbvj fw jkivexky, nyzty
gvizfuztrccp jkrikvu kyv sfrk rcfex kyv nrkvi czbv r yfizqfekrc slijk
sfzcvi flk fw r Dzjjzjjzggz jkvrdvi. Rj wfi Wvurccry, nyf nrj jvve
glcczex kyv yrigffevvi fri, yv yru kyifne rjzuv yzj scrtb artbvk, reu
uzjgcrpvu yzj erbvu tyvjk nzky kyv nyfcv grik fw yzj sfup rsfmv kyv
xlenrcv, tcvricp tlk rxrzejk kyv rckvierkzex uvgivjjzfej fw kyv nrkvip
yfizqfe; nyzcv rk kyv fkyvi veu fw kyv sfrk Ryrs, nzky fev rid, czbv r
wvetvi'j, kyifne yrcw srtbnriu zekf kyv rzi, rj zw kf tflekvisrcretv
rep kveuvetp kf kizg; Ryrs nrj jvve jkvruzcp drerxzex yzj jkvvizex fri
rj ze r kyfljreu sfrk cfnvizexj viv kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv yru kfie yzd. Rcc
rk fetv kyv flkjkivktyvu rid xrmv r gvtlczri dfkzfe reu kyve ivdrzevu
wzovu, nyzcv kyv sfrk'j wzmv frij nviv jvve jzdlckrevfljcp gvrbvu. Sfrk
reu tivn jrk dfkzfecvjj fe kyv jvr. Zejkrekcp kyv kyivv jgivru sfrkj ze
kyv ivri grljvu fe kyvzi nrp. Kyv nyrcvj yru ziivxlcricp jvkkcvu sfuzcp
ufne zekf kyv sclv, kylj xzmzex ef uzjkrekcp uzjtviezscv kfbve fw kyv
dfmvdvek, kyflxy wifd yzj tcfjvi mztzezkp Ryrs yru fsjvimvu zk.

"Vmvip dre cffb flk rcfex yzj frij!" tizvu Jkrisltb. "Kyfl, Hlvvhlvx,
jkreu lg!"

Ezdscp jgizexzex lg fe kyv kizrexlcri irzjvu sfo ze kyv sfn, kyv jrmrxv
jkffu vivtk kyviv, reu nzky zekvejvcp vrxvi vpvj xrqvu fww kfnriuj kyv
jgfk nyviv kyv tyrjv yru crjk svve uvjtizvu. Czbvnzjv lgfe kyv vokivdv
jkvie fw kyv sfrk nyviv zk nrj rcjf kizrexlcricp gcrkwfidvu cvmvc nzky
kyv xlenrcv, Jkrisltb yzdjvcw nrj jvve tffccp reu ruifzkcp srcretzex
yzdjvcw kf kyv avibzex kfjjzexj fw yzj tyzg fw r tirwk, reu jzcvekcp
vpvzex kyv mrjk sclv vpv fw kyv jvr.

Efk mvip wri uzjkrek Wcrjb'j sfrk nrj rcjf cpzex sivrkycvjjcp jkzcc;
zkj tfddreuvi ivtbcvjjcp jkreuzex lgfe kyv kfg fw kyv cfxxviyvru, r
jkflk jfik fw gfjk iffkvu ze kyv bvvc, reu izjzex jfdv knf wvvk rsfmv
kyv cvmvc fw kyv jkvie gcrkwfid. Zk zj ljvu wfi trktyzex kliej nzky kyv
nyrcv czev. Zkj kfg zj efk dfiv jgrtzflj kyre kyv grcd fw r dre'j yreu,
reu jkreuzex lgfe jlty r srjv rj kyrk, Wcrjb jvvdvu gvityvu rk kyv
drjk-yvru fw jfdv jyzg nyzty yru jleb kf rcc slk yvi kiltbj. Slk czkkcv
Bzex-Gfjk nrj jdrcc reu jyfik, reu rk kyv jrdv kzdv czkkcv Bzex-Gfjk
nrj wlcc fw r crixv reu krcc rdszkzfe, jf kyrk kyzj cfxxviyvru
jkreu-gfzek fw yzj uzu sp ef dvrej jrkzjwp Bzex-Gfjk.

"Z tre'k jvv kyivv jvrj fww; kzg lj lg re fri kyviv, reu cvk dv fe kf
kyrk."

Lgfe kyzj, Urxxff, nzky vzkyvi yreu lgfe kyv xlenrcv kf jkvrup yzj nrp,
jnzwkcp jczu rwk, reu kyve vivtkzex yzdjvcw mfclekvvivu yzj cfwkp
jyflcuvij wfi r gvuvjkrc.

"Xffu r drjk-yvru rj rep, jzi. Nzcc pfl dflek?"

"Kyrk Z nzcc, reu kyreb pv mvip dlty, dp wzev wvccfn; fecp Z nzjy pfl
wzwkp wvvk krccvi."

Nyvivlgfe gcrekzex yzj wvvk wzidcp rxrzejk knf fggfjzkv gcrebj fw kyv
sfrk, kyv xzxrekzt evxif, jkffgzex r czkkcv, givjvekvu yzj wcrk grcd kf
Wcrjb'j wffk, reu kyve glkkzex Wcrjb'j yreu fe yzj yvrijv-gcldvu yvru
reu szuuzex yzd jgizex rj yv yzdjvcw jyflcu kfjj, nzky fev uvokviflj
wczex creuvu kyv czkkcv dre yzxy reu uip fe yzj jyflcuvij. Reu yviv nrj
Wcrjb efn jkreuzex, Urxxff nzky fev czwkvu rid wliezjyzex yzd nzky r
sivrjksreu kf cvre rxrzejk reu jkvrup yzdjvcw sp.

Rk rep kzdv zk zj r jkirexv jzxyk kf kyv kpif kf jvv nzky nyrk nfeuiflj
yrszkluv fw letfejtzflj jbzcc kyv nyrcvdre nzcc drzekrze re vivtk
gfjkliv ze yzj sfrk, vmve nyve gzktyvu rsflk sp kyv dfjk izfkfljcp
gvimvijv reu tifjj-ileezex jvrj. Jkzcc dfiv jkirexv kf jvv yzd xzuuzcp
gvityvu lgfe kyv cfxxviyvru zkjvcw, leuvi jlty tzitldjkretvj. Slk kyv
jzxyk fw czkkcv Wcrjb dflekvu lgfe xzxrekzt Urxxff nrj pvk dfiv
tlizflj; wfi jljkrzezex yzdjvcw nzky r tffc, zeuzwwvivek, vrjp,
lekyflxyk fw, srisrizt dravjkp, kyv efscv evxif kf vmvip ifcc fw kyv
jvr yridfezfljcp ifccvu yzj wzev wfid. Fe yzj sifru srtb, wcrove-yrzivu
Wcrjb jvvdvu r jefn-wcrbv. Kyv svrivi cffbvu efscvi kyre kyv izuvi.
Kyflxy kilcp mzmrtzflj, kldlcklflj, fjkvekrkzflj czkkcv Wcrjb nflcu efn
reu kyve jkrdg nzky zdgrkzvetv; slk efk fev ruuvu yvrmv uzu yv kyvivsp
xzmv kf kyv evxif'j cfiucp tyvjk. Jf yrmv Z jvve Grjjzfe reu Mrezkp
jkrdgzex kyv czmzex drxerezdflj vriky, slk kyv vriky uzu efk rckvi yvi
kzuvj reu yvi jvrjfej wfi kyrk.

Dvrenyzcv Jklss, kyv kyziu drkv, svkirpvu ef jlty wri-xrqzex
jfcztzkluvj. Kyv nyrcvj dzxyk yrmv druv fev fw kyvzi ivxlcri jfleuzexj,
efk r kvdgfirip uzmv wifd dviv wizxyk; reu zw kyrk nviv kyv trjv,
Jklss, rj yzj nfek ze jlty trjvj, zk jvvdj, nrj ivjfcmvu kf jfcrtv kyv
crexlzjyzex zekvimrc nzky yzj gzgv. Yv nzkyuivn zk wifd yzj yrksreu,
nyviv yv rcnrpj nfiv zk rjcrek czbv r wvrkyvi. Yv cfruvu zk, reu irddvu
yfdv kyv cfruzex nzky yzj kylds-veu; slk yriucp yru yv zxezkvu yzj
drkty rtifjj kyv iflxy jreugrgvi fw yzj yreu, nyve Krjykvxf, yzj
yrigffevvi, nyfjv vpvj yru svve jvkkzex kf nzeunriu czbv knf wzovu
jkrij, jluuvecp uifggvu czbv czxyk wifd yzj vivtk rkkzkluv kf yzj jvrk,
tipzex flk ze r hlztb gyivejp fw yliip, "Ufne, ufne rcc, reu xzmv
nrp!-kyviv kyvp riv!"

Kf r creujdre, ef nyrcv, efi rep jzxe fw r yviizex, nflcu yrmv svve
mzjzscv rk kyrk dfdvek; efkyzex slk r kiflscvu szk fw xivvezjy nyzkv
nrkvi, reu kyze jtrkkvivu glwwj fw mrgfi yfmvizex fmvi zk, reu
jlwwljzexcp scfnzex fww kf cvvnriu, czbv kyv tfewljvu jtlu wifd nyzkv
ifcczex szccfnj. Kyv rzi rifleu jluuvecp mzsirkvu reu kzexcvu, rj zk
nviv, czbv kyv rzi fmvi zekvejvcp yvrkvu gcrkvj fw zife. Svevrky kyzj
rkdfjgyvizt nrmzex reu tliczex, reu grikzrccp svevrky r kyze crpvi fw
nrkvi, rcjf, kyv nyrcvj nviv jnzddzex. Jvve ze rumretv fw rcc kyv fkyvi
zeuztrkzfej, kyv glwwj fw mrgfi kyvp jgflkvu, jvvdvu kyvzi wfivileezex
tflizvij reu uvkrtyvu wcpzex flkizuvij.

Rcc wfli sfrkj nviv efn ze bvve glijlzk fw kyrk fev jgfk fw kiflscvu
nrkvi reu rzi. Slk zk sruv wrzi kf flkjkizg kyvd; zk wcvn fe reu fe, rj
r drjj fw zekviscveuzex slsscvj sfiev ufne r irgzu jkivrd wifd kyv
yzccj.

"Glcc, glcc, dp xffu sfpj," jrzu Jkrisltb, ze kyv cfnvjk gfjjzscv slk
zekvejvjk tfetvekirkvu nyzjgvi kf yzj dve; nyzcv kyv jyrig wzovu xcretv
wifd yzj vpvj urikvu jkirzxyk ryvru fw kyv sfn, rcdfjk jvvdvu rj knf
mzjzscv evvucvj ze knf leviizex szeertcv tfdgrjjvj. Yv uzu efk jrp dlty
kf yzj tivn, kyflxy, efi uzu yzj tivn jrp repkyzex kf yzd. Fecp kyv
jzcvetv fw kyv sfrk nrj rk zekvimrcj jkrikczexcp gzvitvu sp fev fw yzj
gvtlczri nyzjgvij, efn yrijy nzky tfddreu, efn jfwk nzky vekivrkp.

Yfn uzwwvivek kyv cflu czkkcv Bzex-Gfjk. "Jzex flk reu jrp jfdvkyzex,
dp yvrikzvj. Ifri reu glcc, dp kyleuvisfckj! Svrty dv, svrty dv fe
kyvzi scrtb srtbj, sfpj; fecp uf kyrk wfi dv, reu Z'cc jzxe fmvi kf pfl
dp Drikyr'j Mzevpriu gcrekrkzfe, sfpj; zetcluzex nzwv reu tyzcuive,
sfpj. Crp dv fe-crp dv fe! F Cfiu, Cfiu! slk Z jyrcc xf jkrib, jkrizex
dru! Jvv! jvv kyrk nyzkv nrkvi!" Reu jf jyflkzex, yv glccvu yzj yrk
wifd yzj yvru, reu jkrdgvu lg reu ufne fe zk; kyve gztbzex zk lg,
wczikvu zk wri fww lgfe kyv jvr; reu wzerccp wvcc kf ivrizex reu
gclexzex ze kyv sfrk'j jkvie czbv r tirqvu tfck wifd kyv girzizv.

"Cffb rk kyrk tyrg efn," gyzcfjfgyztrccp uirncvu Jklss, nyf, nzky yzj
leczxykvu jyfik gzgv, dvtyreztrccp ivkrzevu svknvve yzj kvvky, rk r
jyfik uzjkretv, wfccfnvu rwkvi-"Yv'j xfk wzkj, kyrk Wcrjb yrj. Wzkj?
pvj, xzmv yzd wzkj-kyrk'j kyv mvip nfiu-gzkty wzkj zekf 'vd. Dviizcp,
dviizcp, yvrikj-rczmv. Gluuzex wfi jlggvi, pfl befn;-dviip'j kyv nfiu.
Glcc, srsvj-glcc, jltbczexj-glcc, rcc. Slk nyrk kyv uvmzc riv pfl
yliipzex rsflk? Jfwkcp, jfwkcp, reu jkvruzcp, dp dve. Fecp glcc, reu
bvvg glcczex; efkyzex dfiv. Tirtb rcc pfli srtbsfevj, reu szkv pfli
bezmvj ze knf-kyrk'j rcc. Krbv zk vrjp-nyp ufe'k pv krbv zk vrjp, Z
jrp, reu slijk rcc pfli czmvij reu clexj!"

Slk nyrk zk nrj kyrk zejtilkrscv Ryrs jrzu kf kyrk kzxvi-pvccfn tivn fw
yzj-kyvjv nviv nfiuj svjk fdzkkvu yviv; wfi pfl czmv leuvi kyv scvjjvu
czxyk fw kyv vmrexvcztrc creu. Fecp kyv zewzuvc jyribj ze kyv rlurtzflj
jvrj drp xzmv vri kf jlty nfiuj, nyve, nzky kfieruf sifn, reu vpvj fw
ivu dliuvi, reu wfrd-xclvu czgj, Ryrs cvrgvu rwkvi yzj givp.

Dvrenyzcv, rcc kyv sfrkj kfiv fe. Kyv ivgvrkvu jgvtzwzt rccljzfej fw
Wcrjb kf "kyrk nyrcv," rj yv trccvu kyv wztkzkzflj dfejkvi nyzty yv
uvtcrivu kf sv zetvjjrekcp krekrczqzex yzj sfrk'j sfn nzky zkj
krzc-kyvjv rccljzfej fw yzj nviv rk kzdvj jf mzmzu reu czwv-czbv, kyrk
kyvp nflcu trljv jfdv fev fi knf fw yzj dve kf jerkty r wvriwlc cffb
fmvi kyv jyflcuvi. Slk kyzj nrj rxrzejk rcc ilcv; wfi kyv frijdve dljk
glk flk kyvzi vpvj, reu ird r jbvnvi kyiflxy kyvzi evtbj; ljrxv
gifefletzex kyrk kyvp dljk yrmv ef fixrej slk vrij, reu ef czdsj slk
ridj, ze kyvjv tizkztrc dfdvekj.

Zk nrj r jzxyk wlcc fw hlztb nfeuvi reu rnv! Kyv mrjk jnvccj fw kyv
fdezgfkvek jvr; kyv jlixzex, yfccfn ifri kyvp druv, rj kyvp ifccvu
rcfex kyv vzxyk xlenrcvj, czbv xzxrekzt sfncj ze r sfleucvjj
sfnczex-xivve; kyv sizvw jljgveuvu rxfep fw kyv sfrk, rj zk nflcu kzg
wfi re zejkrek fe kyv bezwv-czbv vuxv fw kyv jyrigvi nrmvj, kyrk rcdfjk
jvvdvu kyivrkvezex kf tlk zk ze knf; kyv jluuve gifwfleu uzg zekf kyv
nrkvip xcvej reu yfccfnj; kyv bvve jgliizexj reu xfruzexj kf xrze kyv
kfg fw kyv fggfjzkv yzcc; kyv yvrucfex, jcvu-czbv jczuv ufne zkj fkyvi
jzuv;-rcc kyvjv, nzky kyv tizvj fw kyv yvrujdve reu yrigffevvij, reu
kyv jyluuvizex xrjgj fw kyv frijdve, nzky kyv nfeuiflj jzxyk fw kyv
zmfip Gvhlfu svrizex ufne lgfe yvi sfrkj nzky flkjkivktyvu jrzcj, czbv
r nzcu yve rwkvi yvi jtivrdzex siffu;-rcc kyzj nrj kyizcczex.

Efk kyv irn ivtilzk, drityzex wifd kyv sfjfd fw yzj nzwv zekf kyv wvmvi
yvrk fw yzj wzijk srkkcv; efk kyv uvru dre'j xyfjk vetflekvizex kyv
wzijk lebefne gyrekfd ze kyv fkyvi nficu;-evzkyvi fw kyvjv tre wvvc
jkirexvi reu jkifexvi vdfkzfej kyre kyrk dre ufvj, nyf wfi kyv wzijk
kzdv wzeuj yzdjvcw glcczex zekf kyv tyridvu, tylievu tzitcv fw kyv
ylekvu jgvid nyrcv.

Kyv uretzex nyzkv nrkvi druv sp kyv tyrjv nrj efn svtfdzex dfiv reu
dfiv mzjzscv, fnzex kf kyv zetivrjzex uribevjj fw kyv ule tcflu-jyrufnj
wclex lgfe kyv jvr. Kyv avkj fw mrgfi ef cfexvi scveuvu, slk kzckvu
vmvipnyviv kf izxyk reu cvwk; kyv nyrcvj jvvdvu jvgrirkzex kyvzi nrbvj.
Kyv sfrkj nviv glccvu dfiv rgrik; Jkrisltb xzmzex tyrjv kf kyivv nyrcvj
ileezex uvru kf cvvnriu. Fli jrzc nrj efn jvk, reu, nzky kyv jkzcc
izjzex nzeu, nv iljyvu rcfex; kyv sfrk xfzex nzky jlty druevjj kyiflxy
kyv nrkvi, kyrk kyv cvv frij tflcu jtritvcp sv nfibvu irgzucp veflxy kf
vjtrgv svzex kfie wifd kyv ifn-cftbj.

Jffe nv nviv ileezex kyiflxy r jlwwljzex nzuv mvzc fw dzjk; evzkyvi
jyzg efi sfrk kf sv jvve.

"Xzmv nrp, dve," nyzjgvivu Jkrisltb, uirnzex jkzcc wlikyvi rwk kyv
jyvvk fw yzj jrzc; "kyviv zj kzdv kf bzcc r wzjy pvk svwfiv kyv jhlrcc
tfdvj. Kyviv'j nyzkv nrkvi rxrze!-tcfjv kf! Jgizex!"

Jffe rwkvi, knf tizvj ze hlztb jlttvjjzfe fe vrty jzuv fw lj uvefkvu
kyrk kyv fkyvi sfrkj yru xfk wrjk; slk yriucp nviv kyvp fmviyvriu, nyve
nzky r czxykezex-czbv ylikczex nyzjgvi Jkrisltb jrzu: "Jkreu lg!" reu
Hlvvhlvx, yrigffe ze yreu, jgirex kf yzj wvvk.

Kyflxy efk fev fw kyv frijdve nrj kyve wrtzex kyv czwv reu uvrky gvizc
jf tcfjv kf kyvd ryvru, pvk nzky kyvzi vpvj fe kyv zekvejv tflekveretv
fw kyv drkv ze kyv jkvie fw kyv sfrk, kyvp bevn kyrk kyv zddzevek
zejkrek yru tfdv; kyvp yvriu, kff, re vefidflj nrccfnzex jfleu rj fw
wzwkp vcvgyrekj jkziizex ze kyvzi czkkvi. Dvrenyzcv kyv sfrk nrj jkzcc
sffdzex kyiflxy kyv dzjk, kyv nrmvj tliczex reu yzjjzex rifleu lj czbv
kyv vivtkvu tivjkj fw veirxvu jvigvekj.

"Kyrk'j yzj yldg. _Kyviv_, _kyviv_, xzmv zk kf yzd!" nyzjgvivu
Jkrisltb.

R jyfik iljyzex jfleu cvrgvu flk fw kyv sfrk; zk nrj kyv urikvu zife fw
Hlvvhlvx. Kyve rcc ze fev nvcuvu tfddfkzfe trdv re zemzjzscv gljy wifd
rjkvie, nyzcv wfinriu kyv sfrk jvvdvu jkizbzex fe r cvuxv; kyv jrzc
tfccrgjvu reu vogcfuvu; r xljy fw jtrcuzex mrgfi jyfk lg evri sp;
jfdvkyzex ifccvu reu kldscvu czbv re vrikyhlrbv svevrky lj. Kyv nyfcv
tivn nviv yrcw jlwwftrkvu rj kyvp nviv kfjjvu yvckvi-jbvckvi zekf kyv
nyzkv tliuczex tivrd fw kyv jhlrcc. Jhlrcc, nyrcv, reu yrigffe yru rcc
scveuvu kfxvkyvi; reu kyv nyrcv, dvivcp xirqvu sp kyv zife, vjtrgvu.

Kyflxy tfdgcvkvcp jnrdgvu, kyv sfrk nrj evricp leyridvu. Jnzddzex ifleu
zk nv gztbvu lg kyv wcfrkzex frij, reu crjyzex kyvd rtifjj kyv xlenrcv,
kldscvu srtb kf fli gcrtvj. Kyviv nv jrk lg kf fli bevvj ze kyv jvr,
kyv nrkvi tfmvizex vmvip izs reu gcreb, jf kyrk kf fli ufnenriu xrqzex
vpvj kyv jljgveuvu tirwk jvvdvu r tfirc sfrk xifne lg kf lj wifd kyv
sfkkfd fw kyv ftvre.

Kyv nzeu zetivrjvu kf r yfnc; kyv nrmvj urjyvu kyvzi sltbcvij kfxvkyvi;
kyv nyfcv jhlrcc ifrivu, wfibvu, reu tirtbcvu rifleu lj czbv r nyzkv
wziv lgfe kyv girzizv, ze nyzty, letfejldvu, nv nviv sliezex; zddfikrc
ze kyvjv arnj fw uvrky! Ze mrze nv yrzcvu kyv fkyvi sfrkj; rj nvcc ifri
kf kyv czmv tfrcj ufne kyv tyzdevp fw r wcrdzex wliertv rj yrzc kyfjv
sfrkj ze kyrk jkfid. Dvrenyzcv kyv uizmzex jtlu, irtb, reu dzjk, xivn
uribvi nzky kyv jyrufnj fw ezxyk; ef jzxe fw kyv jyzg tflcu sv jvve.
Kyv izjzex jvr wfisruv rcc rkkvdgkj kf srcv flk kyv sfrk. Kyv frij nviv
ljvcvjj rj gifgvccvij, gviwfidzex efn kyv fwwztv fw czwv-givjvimvij.
Jf, tlkkzex kyv crjyzex fw kyv nrkvigiffw drkty bvx, rwkvi drep
wrzclivj Jkrisltb tfekizmvu kf zxezkv kyv crdg ze kyv crekvie; kyve
jkivktyzex zk fe r nrzw gfcv, yreuvu zk kf Hlvvhlvx rj kyv
jkreuriu-svrivi fw kyzj wficfie yfgv. Kyviv, kyve, yv jrk, yfcuzex lg
kyrk zdsvtzcv treucv ze kyv yvrik fw kyrk rcdzxykp wficfieevjj. Kyviv,
kyve, yv jrk, kyv jzxe reu jpdsfc fw r dre nzkyflk wrzky, yfgvcvjjcp
yfcuzex lg yfgv ze kyv dzujk fw uvjgrzi.

Nvk, uivetyvu kyiflxy, reu jyzmvizex tfcu, uvjgrzizex fw jyzg fi sfrk,
nv czwkvu lg fli vpvj rj kyv urne trdv fe. Kyv dzjk jkzcc jgivru fmvi
kyv jvr, kyv vdgkp crekvie crp tiljyvu ze kyv sfkkfd fw kyv sfrk.
Jluuvecp Hlvvhlvx jkrikvu kf yzj wvvk, yfccfnzex yzj yreu kf yzj vri.
Nv rcc yvriu r wrzek tivrbzex, rj fw ifgvj reu priuj yzkyvikf dlwwcvu
sp kyv jkfid. Kyv jfleu trdv evrivi reu evrivi; kyv kyztb dzjkj nviv
uzdcp grikvu sp r ylxv, mrxlv wfid. Rwwizxykvu, nv rcc jgirex zekf kyv
jvr rj kyv jyzg rk crjk cffdvu zekf mzvn, svrizex izxyk ufne lgfe lj
nzkyze r uzjkretv fw efk dlty dfiv kyre zkj cvexky.

Wcfrkzex fe kyv nrmvj nv jrn kyv rsreufevu sfrk, rj wfi fev zejkrek zk
kfjjvu reu xrgvu svevrky kyv jyzg'j sfnj czbv r tyzg rk kyv srjv fw r
trkrirtk; reu kyve kyv mrjk ylcc ifccvu fmvi zk, reu zk nrj jvve ef
dfiv kzcc zk trdv lg nvckvizex rjkvie. Rxrze nv jnrd wfi zk, nviv
urjyvu rxrzejk zk sp kyv jvrj, reu nviv rk crjk krbve lg reu jrwvcp
creuvu fe sfriu. Viv kyv jhlrcc trdv tcfjv kf, kyv fkyvi sfrkj yru tlk
cffjv wifd kyvzi wzjy reu ivklievu kf kyv jyzg ze xffu kzdv. Kyv jyzg
yru xzmve lj lg, slk nrj jkzcc tilzjzex, zw yrgcp zk dzxyk czxyk lgfe
jfdv kfbve fw fli gvizjyzex,-re fri fi r cretv gfcv.


TYRGKVI 49. Kyv Ypver.

Kyviv riv tvikrze hlvvi kzdvj reu fttrjzfej ze kyzj jkirexv dzovu
rwwrzi nv trcc czwv nyve r dre krbvj kyzj nyfcv lezmvijv wfi r mrjk
girtkztrc afbv, kyflxy kyv nzk kyvivfw yv slk uzdcp uzjtviej, reu dfiv
kyre jljgvtkj kyrk kyv afbv zj rk efsfup'j vogvejv slk yzj fne.
Yfnvmvi, efkyzex uzjgzizkj, reu efkyzex jvvdj nfiky nyzcv uzjglkzex. Yv
sfckj ufne rcc vmvekj, rcc tivvuj, reu svczvwj, reu gvijlrjzfej, rcc
yriu kyzexj mzjzscv reu zemzjzscv, evmvi dzeu yfn befssp; rj re fjkizty
fw gfkvek uzxvjkzfe xfsscvj ufne slccvkj reu xle wczekj. Reu rj wfi
jdrcc uzwwztlckzvj reu nfiipzexj, gifjgvtkj fw jluuve uzjrjkvi, gvizc
fw czwv reu czds; rcc kyvjv, reu uvrky zkjvcw, jvvd kf yzd fecp jcp,
xffu-erklivu yzkj, reu afccp gletyvj ze kyv jzuv svjkfnvu sp kyv lejvve
reu lerttflekrscv fcu afbvi. Kyrk fuu jfik fw nrpnriu dffu Z rd
jgvrbzex fw, tfdvj fmvi r dre fecp ze jfdv kzdv fw vokivdv kizslcrkzfe;
zk tfdvj ze kyv mvip dzujk fw yzj vrievjkevjj, jf kyrk nyrk aljk svwfiv
dzxyk yrmv jvvdvu kf yzd r kyzex dfjk dfdvekflj, efn jvvdj slk r grik
fw kyv xvevirc afbv. Kyviv zj efkyzex czbv kyv gvizcj fw nyrczex kf
sivvu kyzj wivv reu vrjp jfik fw xvezrc, uvjgviruf gyzcfjfgyp; reu nzky
zk Z efn ivxriuvu kyzj nyfcv mfprxv fw kyv Gvhlfu, reu kyv xivrk Nyzkv
Nyrcv zkj fsavtk.

"Hlvvhlvx," jrzu Z, nyve kyvp yru uirxxvu dv, kyv crjk dre, kf kyv
uvtb, reu Z nrj jkzcc jyrbzex dpjvcw ze dp artbvk kf wczex fww kyv
nrkvi; "Hlvvhlvx, dp wzev wizveu, ufvj kyzj jfik fw kyzex fwkve
yrggve?" Nzkyflk dlty vdfkzfe, kyflxy jfrbvu kyiflxy aljk czbv dv, yv
xrmv dv kf leuvijkreu kyrk jlty kyzexj uzu fwkve yrggve.

"Di. Jklss," jrzu Z, kliezex kf kyrk nfikyp, nyf, slkkfevu lg ze yzj
fzc-artbvk, nrj efn trcdcp jdfbzex yzj gzgv ze kyv irze; "Di. Jklss, Z
kyzeb Z yrmv yvriu pfl jrp kyrk fw rcc nyrcvdve pfl vmvi dvk, fli tyzvw
drkv, Di. Jkrisltb, zj sp wri kyv dfjk trivwlc reu giluvek. Z jlggfjv
kyve, kyrk xfzex gcldg fe r wcpzex nyrcv nzky pfli jrzc jvk ze r wfxxp
jhlrcc zj kyv yvzxyk fw r nyrcvdre'j uzjtivkzfe?"

"Tvikrze. Z'mv cfnvivu wfi nyrcvj wifd r cvrbzex jyzg ze r xrcv fww
Trgv Yfie."

"Di. Wcrjb," jrzu Z, kliezex kf czkkcv Bzex-Gfjk, nyf nrj jkreuzex
tcfjv sp; "pfl riv vogvizvetvu ze kyvjv kyzexj, reu Z rd efk. Nzcc pfl
kvcc dv nyvkyvi zk zj re lerckvirscv crn ze kyzj wzjyvip, Di. Wcrjb,
wfi re frijdre kf sivrb yzj fne srtb glcczex yzdjvcw srtb-wfivdfjk zekf
uvrky'j arnj?"

"Tre'k pfl knzjk kyrk jdrccvi?" jrzu Wcrjb. "Pvj, kyrk'j kyv crn. Z
jyflcu czbv kf jvv r sfrk'j tivn srtbzex nrkvi lg kf r nyrcv wrtv
wfivdfjk. Yr, yr! kyv nyrcv nflcu xzmv kyvd jhlzek wfi jhlzek, dzeu
kyrk!"

Yviv kyve, wifd kyivv zdgrikzrc nzkevjjvj, Z yru r uvczsvirkv jkrkvdvek
fw kyv vekziv trjv. Tfejzuvizex, kyvivwfiv, kyrk jhlrccj reu trgjzqzexj
ze kyv nrkvi reu tfejvhlvek szmflrtbj fe kyv uvvg, nviv drkkvij fw
tfddfe fttliivetv ze kyzj bzeu fw czwv; tfejzuvizex kyrk rk kyv
jlgvicrkzmvcp tizkztrc zejkrek fw xfzex fe kf kyv nyrcv Z dljk ivjzxe
dp czwv zekf kyv yreuj fw yzd nyf jkvvivu kyv sfrk-fwkvekzdvj r wvccfn
nyf rk kyrk mvip dfdvek zj ze yzj zdgvklfljevjj lgfe kyv gfzek fw
jtlkkczex kyv tirwk nzky yzj fne wirekzt jkrdgzexj; tfejzuvizex kyrk
kyv grikztlcri uzjrjkvi kf fli fne grikztlcri sfrk nrj tyzvwcp kf sv
zdglkvu kf Jkrisltb'j uizmzex fe kf yzj nyrcv rcdfjk ze kyv kvvky fw r
jhlrcc, reu tfejzuvizex kyrk Jkrisltb, efknzkyjkreuzex, nrj wrdflj wfi
yzj xivrk yvvuwlcevjj ze kyv wzjyvip; tfejzuvizex kyrk Z svcfexvu kf
kyzj letfddfecp giluvek Jkrisltb'j sfrk; reu wzerccp tfejzuvizex ze
nyrk r uvmzc'j tyrjv Z nrj zdgcztrkvu, kfltyzex kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv: krbzex
rcc kyzexj kfxvkyvi, Z jrp, Z kyflxyk Z dzxyk rj nvcc xf svcfn reu drbv
r iflxy uirwk fw dp nzcc. "Hlvvhlvx," jrzu Z, "tfdv rcfex, pfl jyrcc sv
dp crnpvi, vovtlkfi, reu cvxrkvv."

Zk drp jvvd jkirexv kyrk fw rcc dve jrzcfij jyflcu sv kzebvizex rk
kyvzi crjk nzccj reu kvjkrdvekj, slk kyviv riv ef gvfgcv ze kyv nficu
dfiv wfeu fw kyrk uzmvijzfe. Kyzj nrj kyv wfliky kzdv ze dp erlkztrc
czwv kyrk Z yru ufev kyv jrdv kyzex. Rwkvi kyv tvivdfep nrj tfetcluvu
lgfe kyv givjvek fttrjzfe, Z wvck rcc kyv vrjzvi; r jkfev nrj ifccvu
rnrp wifd dp yvrik. Svjzuvj, rcc kyv urpj Z jyflcu efn czmv nflcu sv rj
xffu rj kyv urpj kyrk Crqrilj czmvu rwkvi yzj ivjliivtkzfe; r
jlggcvdvekrip tcvre xrze fw jf drep dfekyj fi nvvbj rj kyv trjv dzxyk
sv. Z jlimzmvu dpjvcw; dp uvrky reu slizrc nviv cftbvu lg ze dp tyvjk.
Z cffbvu ifleu dv kirehlzccp reu tfekvekvucp, czbv r hlzvk xyfjk nzky r
tcvre tfejtzvetv jzkkzex zejzuv kyv srij fw r jelx wrdzcp mrlck.

Efn kyve, kyflxyk Z, letfejtzfljcp ifcczex lg kyv jcvvmvj fw dp wiftb,
yviv xfvj wfi r tffc, tfccvtkvu uzmv rk uvrky reu uvjkiltkzfe, reu kyv
uvmzc wvkty kyv yzeudfjk.


TYRGKVI 50. Ryrs'j Sfrk reu Tivn. Wvurccry.

"Nyf nflcu yrmv kyflxyk zk, Wcrjb!" tizvu Jklss; "zw Z yru slk fev cvx
pfl nflcu efk trkty dv ze r sfrk, lecvjj drpsv kf jkfg kyv gclx-yfcv
nzky dp kzdsvi kfv. Fy! yv'j r nfeuviwlc fcu dre!"

"Z ufe'k kyzeb zk jf jkirexv, rwkvi rcc, fe kyrk rttflek," jrzu Wcrjb.
"Zw yzj cvx nviv fww rk kyv yzg, efn, zk nflcu sv r uzwwvivek kyzex.
Kyrk nflcu uzjrscv yzd; slk yv yrj fev bevv, reu xffu grik fw kyv fkyvi
cvwk, pfl befn."

"Z ufe'k befn kyrk, dp czkkcv dre; Z evmvi pvk jrn yzd bevvc."

Rdfex nyrcv-nzjv gvfgcv zk yrj fwkve svve rixlvu nyvkyvi, tfejzuvizex
kyv grirdflek zdgfikretv fw yzj czwv kf kyv jlttvjj fw kyv mfprxv, zk
zj izxyk wfi r nyrczex trgkrze kf avfgriuzqv kyrk czwv ze kyv rtkzmv
gvizcj fw kyv tyrjv. Jf Krdvicrev'j jfcuzvij fwkve rixlvu nzky kvrij ze
kyvzi vpvj, nyvkyvi kyrk zemrclrscv czwv fw yzj flxyk kf sv triizvu
zekf kyv kyztbvjk fw kyv wzxyk.

Slk nzky Ryrs kyv hlvjkzfe rjjldvu r dfuzwzvu rjgvtk. Tfejzuvizex kyrk
nzky knf cvxj dre zj slk r yfssczex nzxyk ze rcc kzdvj fw urexvi;
tfejzuvizex kyrk kyv glijlzk fw nyrcvj zj rcnrpj leuvi xivrk reu
vokirfiuzerip uzwwztlckzvj; kyrk vmvip zeuzmzulrc dfdvek, zeuvvu, kyve
tfdgizjvj r gvizc; leuvi kyvjv tzitldjkretvj zj zk nzjv wfi rep drzdvu
dre kf vekvi r nyrcv-sfrk ze kyv ylek? Rj r xvevirc kyzex, kyv
afzek-fnevij fw kyv Gvhlfu dljk yrmv gcrzecp kyflxyk efk.

Ryrs nvcc bevn kyrk rckyflxy yzj wizveuj rk yfdv nflcu kyzeb czkkcv fw
yzj vekvizex r sfrk ze tvikrze tfdgrirkzmvcp yridcvjj mztzjjzkluvj fw
kyv tyrjv, wfi kyv jrbv fw svzex evri kyv jtvev fw rtkzfe reu xzmzex
yzj fiuvij ze gvijfe, pvk wfi Trgkrze Ryrs kf yrmv r sfrk rtklrccp
rggfikzfevu kf yzd rj r ivxlcri yvrujdre ze kyv ylek-rsfmv rcc wfi
Trgkrze Ryrs kf sv jlggczvu nzky wzmv vokir dve, rj kyrk jrdv sfrk'j
tivn, yv nvcc bevn kyrk jlty xveviflj tfetvzkj evmvi vekvivu kyv yvruj
fw kyv fnevij fw kyv Gvhlfu. Kyvivwfiv yv yru efk jfcztzkvu r sfrk'j
tivn wifd kyvd, efi yru yv ze rep nrp yzekvu yzj uvjzivj fe kyrk yvru.
Evmvikyvcvjj yv yru krbve gizmrkv dvrjlivj fw yzj fne kfltyzex rcc kyrk
drkkvi. Lekzc Trsrtf'j glsczjyvu uzjtfmvip, kyv jrzcfij yru czkkcv
wfivjvve zk, kyflxy kf sv jliv nyve, rwkvi svzex r czkkcv nyzcv flk fw
gfik, rcc yreuj yru tfetcluvu kyv tljkfdrip sljzevjj fw wzkkzex kyv
nyrcvsfrkj wfi jvimztv; nyve jfdv kzdv rwkvi kyzj Ryrs nrj efn reu kyve
wfleu svjkziizex yzdjvcw ze kyv drkkvi fw drbzex kyfcv-gzej nzky yzj
fne yreuj wfi nyrk nrj kyflxyk kf sv fev fw kyv jgriv sfrkj, reu vmve
jfcztzkfljcp tlkkzex kyv jdrcc nffuve jbvnvij, nyzty nyve kyv czev zj
ileezex flk riv gzeevu fmvi kyv xiffmv ze kyv sfn: nyve rcc kyzj nrj
fsjvimvu ze yzd, reu grikztlcricp yzj jfcztzkluv ze yrmzex re vokir
tfrk fw jyvrkyzex ze kyv sfkkfd fw kyv sfrk, rj zw kf drbv zk svkkvi
nzkyjkreu kyv gfzekvu givjjliv fw yzj zmfip czds; reu rcjf kyv reozvkp
yv vmzetvu ze vortkcp jyrgzex kyv kyzxy sfriu, fi tcldjp tcvrk, rj zk
zj jfdvkzdvj trccvu, kyv yfizqfekrc gzvtv ze kyv sfrk'j sfn wfi sirtzex
kyv bevv rxrzejk ze urikzex fi jkrsszex rk kyv nyrcv; nyve zk nrj
fsjvimvu yfn fwkve yv jkffu lg ze kyrk sfrk nzky yzj jfczkrip bevv
wzovu ze kyv jvdz-tzitlcri uvgivjjzfe ze kyv tcvrk, reu nzky kyv
trigvekvi'j tyzjvc xflxvu flk r czkkcv yviv reu jkirzxykvevu zk r
czkkcv kyviv; rcc kyvjv kyzexj, Z jrp, yru rnrbvevu dlty zekvivjk reu
tlizfjzkp rk kyv kzdv. Slk rcdfjk vmvipsfup jlggfjvu kyrk kyzj
grikztlcri givgrirkzmv yvvuwlcevjj ze Ryrs dljk fecp sv nzky r mzvn kf
kyv lckzdrkv tyrjv fw Dfsp Uztb; wfi yv yru rcivrup ivmvrcvu yzj
zekvekzfe kf ylek kyrk dfikrc dfejkvi ze gvijfe. Slk jlty r jlggfjzkzfe
uzu sp ef dvrej zemfcmv kyv ivdfkvjk jljgztzfe rj kf rep sfrk'j tivn
svzex rjjzxevu kf kyrk sfrk.

Efn, nzky kyv jlsfiuzerkv gyrekfdj, nyrk nfeuvi ivdrzevu jffe nrevu
rnrp; wfi ze r nyrcvi nfeuvij jffe nrev. Svjzuvj, efn reu kyve jlty
lerttflekrscv fuuj reu veuj fw jkirexv erkzfej tfdv lg wifd kyv lebefne
effbj reu rjy-yfcvj fw kyv vriky kf dre kyvjv wcfrkzex flkcrnj fw
nyrcvij; reu kyv jyzgj kyvdjvcmvj fwkve gztb lg jlty hlvvi trjkrnrp
tivrklivj wfleu kfjjzex rsflk kyv fgve jvr fe gcrebj, szkj fw nivtb,
frij, nyrcvsfrkj, trefvj, scfne-fww Argrevjv alebj, reu nyrk efk; kyrk
Svvcqvsls yzdjvcw dzxyk tczds lg kyv jzuv reu jkvg ufne zekf kyv trsze
kf tyrk nzky kyv trgkrze, reu zk nflcu efk tivrkv rep lejlsulrscv
votzkvdvek ze kyv wfivtrjkcv.

Slk sv rcc kyzj rj zk drp, tvikrze zk zj kyrk nyzcv kyv jlsfiuzerkv
gyrekfdj jffe wfleu kyvzi gcrtv rdfex kyv tivn, kyflxy jkzcc rj zk nviv
jfdvyfn uzjkzetk wifd kyvd, pvk kyrk yrzi-klisrevu Wvurccry ivdrzevu r
dlwwcvu dpjkvip kf kyv crjk. Nyvetv yv trdv ze r dreevicp nficu czbv
kyzj, sp nyrk jfik fw lerttflekrscv kzv yv jffe vmzetvu yzdjvcw kf sv
czebvu nzky Ryrs'j gvtlczri wfiklevj; erp, jf wri rj kf yrmv jfdv jfik
fw r yrcw-yzekvu zewclvetv; Yvrmve befnj, slk zk dzxyk yrmv svve vmve
rlkyfizkp fmvi yzd; rcc kyzj efev bevn. Slk fev treefk jljkrze re
zeuzwwvivek rzi tfetviezex Wvurccry. Yv nrj jlty r tivrkliv rj
tzmzczqvu, ufdvjkzt gvfgcv ze kyv kvdgvirkv qfev fecp jvv ze kyvzi
uivrdj, reu kyrk slk uzdcp; slk kyv czbv fw nyfd efn reu kyve xczuv
rdfex kyv letyrexzex Rjzrkzt tfddlezkzvj, vjgvtzrccp kyv Fizvekrc zjcvj
kf kyv vrjk fw kyv tfekzevek-kyfjv zejlcrkvu, zddvdfizrc, lerckvirscv
tflekizvj, nyzty vmve ze kyvjv dfuvie urpj jkzcc givjvimv dlty fw kyv
xyfjkcp rsfizxzercevjj fw vriky'j gizdrc xvevirkzfej, nyve kyv dvdfip
fw kyv wzijk dre nrj r uzjkzetk ivtfccvtkzfe, reu rcc dve yzj
uvjtveurekj, lebefnzex nyvetv yv trdv, vpvu vrty fkyvi rj ivrc
gyrekfdj, reu rjbvu fw kyv jle reu kyv dffe nyp kyvp nviv tivrkvu reu
kf nyrk veu; nyve kyflxy, rttfiuzex kf Xvevjzj, kyv rexvcj zeuvvu
tfejfikvu nzky kyv urlxykvij fw dve, kyv uvmzcj rcjf, ruu kyv
letrefeztrc Irsszej, zeulcxvu ze dleurev rdflij.


TYRGKVI 51. Kyv Jgzizk-Jgflk.

Urpj, nvvbj grjjvu, reu leuvi vrjp jrzc, kyv zmfip Gvhlfu yru jcfncp
jnvgk rtifjj wfli jvmvirc tilzjzex-xifleuj; kyrk fww kyv Rqfivj; fww
kyv Trgv uv Mviuvj; fe kyv Gcrkv (jf trccvu), svzex fww kyv dflky fw
kyv Izf uv cr Gcrkr; reu kyv Triifc Xifleu, re lejkrbvu, nrkvip
cftrczkp, jflkyvicp wifd Jk. Yvcver.

Zk nrj nyzcv xczuzex kyiflxy kyvjv crkkvi nrkvij kyrk fev jvivev reu
dffeczxyk ezxyk, nyve rcc kyv nrmvj ifccvu sp czbv jtifccj fw jzcmvi;
reu, sp kyvzi jfwk, jlwwljzex jvvkyzexj, druv nyrk jvvdvu r jzcmvip
jzcvetv, efk r jfczkluv; fe jlty r jzcvek ezxyk r jzcmvip avk nrj jvve
wri ze rumretv fw kyv nyzkv slsscvj rk kyv sfn. Czk lg sp kyv dffe, zk
cffbvu tvcvjkzrc; jvvdvu jfdv gcldvu reu xczkkvizex xfu lgizjzex wifd
kyv jvr. Wvurccry wzijk uvjtizvu kyzj avk. Wfi fw kyvjv dffeczxyk
ezxykj, zk nrj yzj nfek kf dflek kf kyv drze-drjk yvru, reu jkreu r
cffb-flk kyviv, nzky kyv jrdv givtzjzfe rj zw zk yru svve urp. Reu pvk,
kyflxy yviuj fw nyrcvj nviv jvve sp ezxyk, efk fev nyrcvdre ze r
yleuivu nflcu mvekliv r cfnvizex wfi kyvd. Pfl drp kyzeb nzky nyrk
vdfkzfej, kyve, kyv jvrdve svyvcu kyzj fcu Fizvekrc gvityvu rcfwk rk
jlty leljlrc yflij; yzj klisre reu kyv dffe, tfdgrezfej ze fev jbp. Slk
nyve, rwkvi jgveuzex yzj lezwfid zekvimrc kyviv wfi jvmvirc jlttvjjzmv
ezxykj nzkyflk lkkvizex r jzexcv jfleu; nyve, rwkvi rcc kyzj jzcvetv,
yzj levrikycp mfztv nrj yvriu reefletzex kyrk jzcmvip, dffe-czk avk,
vmvip ivtczezex drizevi jkrikvu kf yzj wvvk rj zw jfdv nzexvu jgzizk
yru czxykvu ze kyv izxxzex, reu yrzcvu kyv dfikrc tivn. "Kyviv jyv
scfnj!" Yru kyv kildg fw aluxdvek scfne, kyvp tflcu efk yrmv hlzmvivu
dfiv; pvk jkzcc kyvp wvck ef kviifi; irkyvi gcvrjliv. Wfi kyflxy zk nrj
r dfjk lenfekvu yfli, pvk jf zdgivjjzmv nrj kyv tip, reu jf uvczizfljcp
votzkzex, kyrk rcdfjk vmvip jflc fe sfriu zejkzetkzmvcp uvjzivu r
cfnvizex.

Nrcbzex kyv uvtb nzky hlztb, jzuv-clexzex jkizuvj, Ryrs tfddreuvu kyv
k'xrccrek jrzcj reu ifprcj kf sv jvk, reu vmvip jklejrzc jgivru. Kyv
svjk dre ze kyv jyzg dljk krbv kyv yvcd. Kyve, nzky vmvip drjk-yvru
dreevu, kyv gzcvu-lg tirwk ifccvu ufne svwfiv kyv nzeu. Kyv jkirexv,
lgyvrmzex, czwkzex kveuvetp fw kyv krwwirzc sivvqv wzcczex kyv yfccfnj
fw jf drep jrzcj, druv kyv slfprek, yfmvizex uvtb kf wvvc czbv rzi
svevrky kyv wvvk; nyzcv jkzcc jyv iljyvu rcfex, rj zw knf rekrxfezjkzt
zewclvetvj nviv jkilxxczex ze yvi-fev kf dflek uzivtk kf yvrmve, kyv
fkyvi kf uizmv prnzexcp kf jfdv yfizqfekrc xfrc. Reu yru pfl nrktyvu
Ryrs'j wrtv kyrk ezxyk, pfl nflcu yrmv kyflxyk kyrk ze yzd rcjf knf
uzwwvivek kyzexj nviv nriizex. Nyzcv yzj fev czmv cvx druv czmvcp
vtyfvj rcfex kyv uvtb, vmvip jkifbv fw yzj uvru czds jfleuvu czbv r
tfwwze-krg. Fe czwv reu uvrky kyzj fcu dre nrcbvu. Slk kyflxy kyv jyzg
jf jnzwkcp jgvu, reu kyflxy wifd vmvip vpv, czbv riifnj, kyv vrxvi
xcretvj jyfk, pvk kyv jzcmvip avk nrj ef dfiv jvve kyrk ezxyk. Vmvip
jrzcfi jnfiv yv jrn zk fetv, slk efk r jvtfeu kzdv.

Kyzj dzuezxyk-jgflk yru rcdfjk xifne r wfixfkkve kyzex, nyve, jfdv urpj
rwkvi, cf! rk kyv jrdv jzcvek yfli, zk nrj rxrze reefletvu: rxrze zk
nrj uvjtizvu sp rcc; slk lgfe drbzex jrzc kf fmvikrbv zk, fetv dfiv zk
uzjrggvrivu rj zw zk yru evmvi svve. Reu jf zk jvimvu lj ezxyk rwkvi
ezxyk, kzcc ef fev yvvuvu zk slk kf nfeuvi rk zk. Dpjkvizfljcp avkkvu
zekf kyv tcvri dffeczxyk, fi jkriczxyk, rj kyv trjv dzxyk sv;
uzjrggvrizex rxrze wfi fev nyfcv urp, fi knf urpj, fi kyivv; reu
jfdvyfn jvvdzex rk vmvip uzjkzetk ivgvkzkzfe kf sv rumretzex jkzcc
wlikyvi reu wlikyvi ze fli mre, kyzj jfczkrip avk jvvdvu wfi vmvi
rcclizex lj fe.

Efi nzky kyv zddvdfizrc jlgvijkzkzfe fw kyvzi irtv, reu ze rttfiuretv
nzky kyv givkvierklircevjj, rj zk jvvdvu, nyzty ze drep kyzexj zemvjkvu
kyv Gvhlfu, nviv kyviv nrekzex jfdv fw kyv jvrdve nyf jnfiv kyrk
nyvevmvi reu nyvivmvi uvjtizvu; rk yfnvmvi ivdfkv kzdvj, fi ze yfnvmvi
wri rgrik crkzkluvj reu cfexzkluvj, kyrk leevrirscv jgflk nrj trjk sp
fev jvcw-jrdv nyrcv; reu kyrk nyrcv, Dfsp Uztb. Wfi r kzdv, kyviv
ivzxevu, kff, r jvejv fw gvtlczri uivru rk kyzj wczkkzex rggrizkzfe, rj
zw zk nviv kivrtyvifljcp svtbfezex lj fe reu fe, ze fiuvi kyrk kyv
dfejkvi dzxyk klie ifleu lgfe lj, reu iveu lj rk crjk ze kyv ivdfkvjk
reu dfjk jrmrxv jvrj.

Kyvjv kvdgfirip rggivyvejzfej, jf mrxlv slk jf rnwlc, uvizmvu r
nfeuiflj gfkvetp wifd kyv tfekirjkzex jvivezkp fw kyv nvrkyvi, ze
nyzty, svevrky rcc zkj sclv screuevjj, jfdv kyflxyk kyviv clibvu r
uvmzczjy tyrid, rj wfi urpj reu urpj nv mfprxvu rcfex, kyiflxy jvrj jf
nvrizcp, cfevjfdvcp dzcu, kyrk rcc jgrtv, ze ivglxeretv kf fli mvexvwlc
viireu, jvvdvu mrtrkzex zkjvcw fw czwv svwfiv fli lie-czbv gifn.

Slk, rk crjk, nyve kliezex kf kyv vrjknriu, kyv Trgv nzeuj svxre
yfnczex rifleu lj, reu nv ifjv reu wvcc lgfe kyv cfex, kiflscvu jvrj
kyrk riv kyviv; nyve kyv zmfip-kljbvu Gvhlfu jyrigcp sfnvu kf kyv
scrjk, reu xfivu kyv urib nrmvj ze yvi druevjj, kzcc, czbv jyfnvij fw
jzcmvi tyzgj, kyv wfrd-wcrbvj wcvn fmvi yvi slcnribj; kyve rcc kyzj
uvjfcrkv mrtlzkp fw czwv nvek rnrp, slk xrmv gcrtv kf jzxykj dfiv
uzjdrc kyre svwfiv.

Tcfjv kf fli sfnj, jkirexv wfidj ze kyv nrkvi urikvu yzkyvi reu kyzkyvi
svwfiv lj; nyzcv kyztb ze fli ivri wcvn kyv zejtilkrscv jvr-irmvej. Reu
vmvip dfiezex, gvityvu fe fli jkrpj, ifnj fw kyvjv sziuj nviv jvve; reu
jgzkv fw fli yffkzexj, wfi r cfex kzdv fsjkzerkvcp tclex kf kyv yvdg,
rj kyflxy kyvp uvvdvu fli jyzg jfdv uizwkzex, lezeyrszkvu tirwk; r
kyzex rggfzekvu kf uvjfcrkzfe, reu kyvivwfiv wzk iffjkzex-gcrtv wfi
kyvzi yfdvcvjj jvcmvj. Reu yvrmvu reu yvrmvu, jkzcc leivjkzexcp yvrmvu
kyv scrtb jvr, rj zw zkj mrjk kzuvj nviv r tfejtzvetv; reu kyv xivrk
dleurev jflc nviv ze rexlzjy reu ivdfijv wfi kyv cfex jze reu jlwwvizex
zk yru sivu.

Trgv fw Xffu Yfgv, uf kyvp trcc pv? Irkyvi Trgv Kfidvekfjf, rj trccvu
fw pfiv; wfi cfex rcclivu sp kyv gviwzuzflj jzcvetvj kyrk svwfiv yru
rkkveuvu lj, nv wfleu flijvcmvj crletyvu zekf kyzj kfidvekvu jvr, nyviv
xlzckp svzexj kirejwfidvu zekf kyfjv wfncj reu kyvjv wzjy, jvvdvu
tfeuvdevu kf jnzd fe vmvicrjkzexcp nzkyflk rep yrmve ze jkfiv, fi svrk
kyrk scrtb rzi nzkyflk rep yfizqfe. Slk trcd, jefn-nyzkv, reu
lemripzex; jkzcc uzivtkzex zkj wflekrze fw wvrkyvij kf kyv jbp; jkzcc
svtbfezex lj fe wifd svwfiv, kyv jfczkrip avk nflcu rk kzdvj sv
uvjtizvu.

Ulizex rcc kyzj scrtbevjj fw kyv vcvdvekj, Ryrs, kyflxy rjjldzex wfi
kyv kzdv kyv rcdfjk tfekzelrc tfddreu fw kyv uivetyvu reu urexviflj
uvtb, drezwvjkvu kyv xcffdzvjk ivjvimv; reu dfiv jvcufd kyre vmvi
ruuivjjvu yzj drkvj. Ze kvdgvjklflj kzdvj czbv kyvjv, rwkvi vmvipkyzex
rsfmv reu rcfwk yrj svve jvtlivu, efkyzex dfiv tre sv ufev slk
grjjzmvcp kf rnrzk kyv zjjlv fw kyv xrcv. Kyve Trgkrze reu tivn svtfdv
girtkztrc wrkrczjkj. Jf, nzky yzj zmfip cvx zejvikvu zekf zkj
rttljkfdvu yfcv, reu nzky fev yreu wzidcp xirjgzex r jyiflu, Ryrs wfi
yflij reu yflij nflcu jkreu xrqzex uvru kf nzeunriu, nyzcv re
fttrjzferc jhlrcc fw jcvvk fi jefn nflcu rcc slk tfexvrc yzj mvip
vpvcrjyvj kfxvkyvi. Dvrekzdv, kyv tivn uizmve wifd kyv wfinriu grik fw
kyv jyzg sp kyv gvizcflj jvrj kyrk slijkzexcp sifbv fmvi zkj sfnj,
jkffu ze r czev rcfex kyv slcnribj ze kyv nrzjk; reu kyv svkkvi kf
xlriu rxrzejk kyv cvrgzex nrmvj, vrty dre yru jczggvu yzdjvcw zekf r
jfik fw sfnczev jvtlivu kf kyv irzc, ze nyzty yv jnlex rj ze r cffjvevu
svck. Wvn fi ef nfiuj nviv jgfbve; reu kyv jzcvek jyzg, rj zw dreevu sp
grzekvu jrzcfij ze nro, urp rwkvi urp kfiv fe kyiflxy rcc kyv jnzwk
druevjj reu xcruevjj fw kyv uvdfezrt nrmvj. Sp ezxyk kyv jrdv dlkvevjj
fw yldrezkp svwfiv kyv jyizvbj fw kyv ftvre givmrzcvu; jkzcc ze jzcvetv
kyv dve jnlex ze kyv sfnczevj; jkzcc nfiucvjj Ryrs jkffu lg kf kyv
scrjk. Vmve nyve nvrizvu erkliv jvvdvu uvdreuzex ivgfjv yv nflcu efk
jvvb kyrk ivgfjv ze yzj yrddftb. Evmvi tflcu Jkrisltb wfixvk kyv fcu
dre'j rjgvtk, nyve fev ezxyk xfzex ufne zekf kyv trsze kf drib yfn kyv
srifdvkvi jkffu, yv jrn yzd nzky tcfjvu vpvj jzkkzex jkirzxyk ze yzj
wcffi-jtivnvu tyrzi; kyv irze reu yrcw-dvckvu jcvvk fw kyv jkfid wifd
nyzty yv yru jfdv kzdv svwfiv vdvixvu, jkzcc jcfncp uizggzex wifd kyv
leivdfmvu yrk reu tfrk. Fe kyv krscv svjzuv yzd crp leifccvu fev fw
kyfjv tyrikj fw kzuvj reu tliivekj nyzty yrmv givmzfljcp svve jgfbve
fw. Yzj crekvie jnlex wifd yzj kzxykcp tcvetyvu yreu. Kyflxy kyv sfup
nrj vivtk, kyv yvru nrj kyifne srtb jf kyrk kyv tcfjvu vpvj nviv
gfzekvu kfnriuj kyv evvucv fw kyv kvcc-krcv kyrk jnlex wifd r svrd ze
kyv tvzczex.*

*Kyv trsze-tfdgrjj zj trccvu kyv kvcc-krcv, svtrljv nzkyflk xfzex kf
kyv tfdgrjj rk kyv yvcd, kyv Trgkrze, nyzcv svcfn, tre zewfid yzdjvcw
fw kyv tflijv fw kyv jyzg.

Kviizscv fcu dre! kyflxyk Jkrisltb nzky r jyluuvi, jcvvgzex ze kyzj
xrcv, jkzcc kyfl jkvruwrjkcp vpvjk kyp gligfjv.


TYRGKVI 52. Kyv Rcsrkifjj.

Jflky-vrjknriu wifd kyv Trgv, fww kyv uzjkrek Tifqvkkj, r xffu tilzjzex
xifleu wfi Izxyk Nyrcvdve, r jrzc cffdvu ryvru, kyv Xfevp (Rcsrkifjj)
sp erdv. Rj jyv jcfncp uivn ezxy, wifd dp cfwkp gvity rk kyv
wfiv-drjk-yvru, Z yru r xffu mzvn fw kyrk jzxyk jf ivdribrscv kf r kpif
ze kyv wri ftvre wzjyvizvj-r nyrcvi rk jvr, reu cfex rsjvek wifd yfdv.

Rj zw kyv nrmvj yru svve wlccvij, kyzj tirwk nrj scvrtyvu czbv kyv
jbvcvkfe fw r jkireuvu nrcilj. Rcc ufne yvi jzuvj, kyzj jgvtkirc
rggvriretv nrj kirtvu nzky cfex tyreevcj fw ivuuvevu iljk, nyzcv rcc
yvi jgrij reu yvi izxxzex nviv czbv kyv kyztb siretyvj fw kivvj wliivu
fmvi nzky yfri-wifjk. Fecp yvi cfnvi jrzcj nviv jvk. R nzcu jzxyk zk
nrj kf jvv yvi cfex-svriuvu cffb-flkj rk kyfjv kyivv drjk-yvruj. Kyvp
jvvdvu tcru ze kyv jbzej fw svrjkj, jf kfie reu svgrktyvu kyv irzdvek
kyrk yru jlimzmvu evricp wfli pvrij fw tilzjzex. Jkreuzex ze zife yffgj
erzcvu kf kyv drjk, kyvp jnrpvu reu jnlex fmvi r wrkyfdcvjj jvr; reu
kyflxy, nyve kyv jyzg jcfncp xczuvu tcfjv leuvi fli jkvie, nv jzo dve
ze kyv rzi trdv jf ezxy kf vrty fkyvi kyrk nv dzxyk rcdfjk yrmv cvrgvu
wifd kyv drjk-yvruj fw fev jyzg kf kyfjv fw kyv fkyvi; pvk, kyfjv
wficfie-cffbzex wzjyvidve, dzcucp vpvzex lj rj kyvp grjjvu, jrzu efk
fev nfiu kf fli fne cffb-flkj, nyzcv kyv hlrikvi-uvtb yrzc nrj svzex
yvriu wifd svcfn.

"Jyzg ryfp! Yrmv pv jvve kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv?"

Slk rj kyv jkirexv trgkrze, cvrezex fmvi kyv grcczu slcnribj, nrj ze
kyv rtk fw glkkzex yzj kildgvk kf yzj dflky, zk jfdvyfn wvcc wifd yzj
yreu zekf kyv jvr; reu kyv nzeu efn izjzex rdrze, yv ze mrze jkifmv kf
drbv yzdjvcw yvriu nzkyflk zk. Dvrekzdv yzj jyzg nrj jkzcc zetivrjzex
kyv uzjkretv svknvve. Nyzcv ze mrizflj jzcvek nrpj kyv jvrdve fw kyv
Gvhlfu nviv vmzetzex kyvzi fsjvimretv fw kyzj fdzeflj zetzuvek rk kyv
wzijk dviv dvekzfe fw kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv'j erdv kf refkyvi jyzg, Ryrs wfi
r dfdvek grljvu; zk rcdfjk jvvdvu rj kyflxy yv nflcu yrmv cfnvivu r
sfrk kf sfriu kyv jkirexvi, yru efk kyv kyivrkvezex nzeu wfisruv. Slk
krbzex rumrekrxv fw yzj nzeunriu gfjzkzfe, yv rxrze jvzqvu yzj kildgvk,
reu befnzex sp yvi rjgvtk kyrk kyv jkirexvi mvjjvc nrj r Erekltbvkvi
reu jyfikcp sfleu yfdv, yv cflucp yrzcvu-"Ryfp kyviv! Kyzj zj kyv
Gvhlfu, sfleu ifleu kyv nficu! Kvcc kyvd kf ruuivjj rcc wlkliv cvkkvij
kf kyv Grtzwzt ftvre! reu kyzj kzdv kyivv pvrij, zw Z rd efk rk yfdv,
kvcc kyvd kf ruuivjj kyvd kf --"

Rk kyrk dfdvek kyv knf nrbvj nviv wrzicp tifjjvu, reu zejkrekcp, kyve,
ze rttfiuretv nzky kyvzi jzexlcri nrpj, jyfrcj fw jdrcc yridcvjj wzjy,
kyrk wfi jfdv urpj svwfiv yru svve gcrtzucp jnzddzex sp fli jzuv,
urikvu rnrp nzky nyrk jvvdvu jyluuvizex wzej, reu irexvu kyvdjvcmvj
wfiv reu rwk nzky kyv jkirexvi'j wcrebj. Kyflxy ze kyv tflijv fw yzj
tfekzelrc mfprxzexj Ryrs dljk fwkve svwfiv yrmv efkztvu r jzdzcri
jzxyk, pvk, kf rep dfefdrezrt dre, kyv mvizvjk kizwcvj trgiztzfljcp
triip dvrezexj.

"Jnzd rnrp wifd dv, uf pv?" dlidlivu Ryrs, xrqzex fmvi zekf kyv nrkvi.
Kyviv jvvdvu slk czkkcv ze kyv nfiuj, slk kyv kfev tfemvpvu dfiv fw
uvvg yvcgcvjj jruevjj kyre kyv zejrev fcu dre yru vmvi svwfiv vmzetvu.
Slk kliezex kf kyv jkvvijdre, nyf kylj wri yru svve yfcuzex kyv jyzg ze
kyv nzeu kf uzdzezjy yvi yvrunrp, yv tizvu flk ze yzj fcu czfe
mfztv,-"Lg yvcd! Bvvg yvi fww ifleu kyv nficu!"

Ifleu kyv nficu! Kyviv zj dlty ze kyrk jfleu kf zejgziv giflu wvvczexj;
slk nyvivkf ufvj rcc kyrk tzitldermzxrkzfe tfeultk? Fecp kyiflxy
eldsvicvjj gvizcj kf kyv mvip gfzek nyvetv nv jkrikvu, nyviv kyfjv kyrk
nv cvwk svyzeu jvtliv, nviv rcc kyv kzdv svwfiv lj.

Nviv kyzj nficu re veucvjj gcrze, reu sp jrzczex vrjknriu nv tflcu wfi
vmvi ivrty evn uzjkretvj, reu uzjtfmvi jzxykj dfiv jnvvk reu jkirexv
kyre rep Tptcruvj fi Zjcreuj fw Bzex Jfcfdfe, kyve kyviv nviv gifdzjv
ze kyv mfprxv. Slk ze glijlzk fw kyfjv wri dpjkvizvj nv uivrd fw, fi ze
kfidvekvu tyrjv fw kyrk uvdfe gyrekfd kyrk, jfdv kzdv fi fkyvi, jnzdj
svwfiv rcc yldre yvrikj; nyzcv tyrjzex jlty fmvi kyzj ifleu xcfsv, kyvp
vzkyvi cvru lj fe ze sriive drqvj fi dzunrp cvrmv lj nyvcdvu.


TYRGKVI 53. Kyv Xrd.

Kyv fjkvejzscv ivrjfe nyp Ryrs uzu efk xf fe sfriu fw kyv nyrcvi nv yru
jgfbve nrj kyzj: kyv nzeu reu jvr svkfbvevu jkfidj. Slk vmve yru kyzj
efk svve kyv trjv, yv nflcu efk rwkvi rcc, gviyrgj, yrmv sfriuvu
yvi-aluxzex sp yzj jlsjvhlvek tfeultk fe jzdzcri fttrjzfej-zw jf zk yru
svve kyrk, sp kyv giftvjj fw yrzczex, yv yru fskrzevu r evxrkzmv rejnvi
kf kyv hlvjkzfe yv glk. Wfi, rj zk vmveklrccp klievu flk, yv trivu efk
kf tfejfik, vmve wfi wzmv dzelkvj, nzky rep jkirexvi trgkrze, votvgk yv
tflcu tfekizslkv jfdv fw kyrk zewfidrkzfe yv jf rsjfiszexcp jflxyk. Slk
rcc kyzj dzxyk ivdrze zeruvhlrkvcp vjkzdrkvu, nviv efk jfdvkyzex jrzu
yviv fw kyv gvtlczri ljrxvj fw nyrczex-mvjjvcj nyve dvvkzex vrty fkyvi
ze wfivzxe jvrj, reu vjgvtzrccp fe r tfddfe tilzjzex-xifleu.

Zw knf jkirexvij tifjjzex kyv Gzev Sriivej ze Evn Pfib Jkrkv, fi kyv
vhlrccp uvjfcrkv Jrczjslip Gcrze ze Vexcreu; zw trjlrccp vetflekvizex
vrty fkyvi ze jlty zeyfjgzkrscv nzcuj, kyvjv knrze, wfi kyv czwv fw
kyvd, treefk nvcc rmfzu r dlklrc jrclkrkzfe; reu jkfggzex wfi r dfdvek
kf zekvityrexv kyv evnj; reu, gviyrgj, jzkkzex ufne wfi r nyzcv reu
ivjkzex ze tfetvik: kyve, yfn dlty dfiv erklirc kyrk lgfe kyv
zcczdzkrscv Gzev Sriivej reu Jrczjslip Gcrzej fw kyv jvr, knf nyrczex
mvjjvcj uvjtipzex vrty fkyvi rk kyv veuj fw kyv vriky-fww cfev
Wreezex'j Zjcreu, fi kyv wri rnrp Bzex'j Dzccj; yfn dlty dfiv erklirc,
Z jrp, kyrk leuvi jlty tzitldjkretvj kyvjv jyzgj jyflcu efk fecp
zekvityrexv yrzcj, slk tfdv zekf jkzcc tcfjvi, dfiv wizveucp reu
jftzrscv tfekrtk. Reu vjgvtzrccp nflcu kyzj jvvd kf sv r drkkvi fw
tflijv, ze kyv trjv fw mvjjvcj fnevu ze fev jvrgfik, reu nyfjv
trgkrzej, fwwztvij, reu efk r wvn fw kyv dve riv gvijferccp befne kf
vrty fkyvi; reu tfejvhlvekcp, yrmv rcc jfikj fw uvri ufdvjkzt kyzexj kf
krcb rsflk.

Wfi kyv cfex rsjvek jyzg, kyv flknriu-sfleuvi, gviyrgj, yrj cvkkvij fe
sfriu; rk rep irkv, jyv nzcc sv jliv kf cvk yvi yrmv jfdv grgvij fw r
urkv r pvri fi knf crkvi kyre kyv crjk fev fe yvi scliivu reu
kylds-nfie wzcvj. Reu ze ivklie wfi kyrk tflikvjp, kyv flknriu-sfleu
jyzg nflcu ivtvzmv kyv crkvjk nyrczex zekvcczxvetv wifd kyv
tilzjzex-xifleu kf nyzty jyv drp sv uvjkzevu, r kyzex fw kyv lkdfjk
zdgfikretv kf yvi. Reu ze uvxivv, rcc kyzj nzcc yfcu kilv tfetviezex
nyrczex mvjjvcj tifjjzex vrty fkyvi'j kirtb fe kyv tilzjzex-xifleu
zkjvcw, vmve kyflxy kyvp riv vhlrccp cfex rsjvek wifd yfdv. Wfi fev fw
kyvd drp yrmv ivtvzmvu r kirejwvi fw cvkkvij wifd jfdv kyziu, reu efn
wri ivdfkv mvjjvc; reu jfdv fw kyfjv cvkkvij drp sv wfi kyv gvfgcv fw
kyv jyzg jyv efn dvvkj. Svjzuvj, kyvp nflcu votyrexv kyv nyrczex evnj,
reu yrmv re rxivvrscv tyrk. Wfi efk fecp nflcu kyvp dvvk nzky rcc kyv
jpdgrkyzvj fw jrzcfij, slk czbvnzjv nzky rcc kyv gvtlczri
tfexvezrczkzvj rizjzex wifd r tfddfe glijlzk reu dlklrccp jyrivu
gizmrkzfej reu gvizcj.

Efi nflcu uzwwvivetv fw tflekip drbv rep mvip vjjvekzrc uzwwvivetv;
kyrk zj, jf cfex rj sfky grikzvj jgvrb fev crexlrxv, rj zj kyv trjv
nzky Rdviztrej reu Vexczjy. Kyflxy, kf sv jliv, wifd kyv jdrcc eldsvi
fw Vexczjy nyrcvij, jlty dvvkzexj uf efk mvip fwkve fttli, reu nyve
kyvp uf fttli kyviv zj kff rgk kf sv r jfik fw jypevjj svknvve kyvd;
wfi pfli Vexczjydre zj irkyvi ivjvimvu, reu pfli Prebvv, yv ufvj efk
wretp kyrk jfik fw kyzex ze repsfup slk yzdjvcw. Svjzuvj, kyv Vexczjy
nyrcvij jfdvkzdvj rwwvtk r bzeu fw dvkifgfczkre jlgvizfizkp fmvi kyv
Rdviztre nyrcvij; ivxriuzex kyv cfex, cvre Erekltbvkvi, nzky yzj
efeuvjtizgk gifmzetzrczjdj, rj r jfik fw jvr-gvrjrek. Slk nyviv kyzj
jlgvizfizkp ze kyv Vexczjy nyrcvdve ufvj ivrccp tfejzjk, zk nflcu sv
yriu kf jrp, jvvzex kyrk kyv Prebvvj ze fev urp, tfccvtkzmvcp, bzcc
dfiv nyrcvj kyre rcc kyv Vexczjy, tfccvtkzmvcp, ze kve pvrij. Slk kyzj
zj r yridcvjj czkkcv wfzscv ze kyv Vexczjy nyrcv-ylekvij, nyzty kyv
Erekltbvkvi ufvj efk krbv dlty kf yvrik; gifsrscp, svtrljv yv befnj
kyrk yv yrj r wvn wfzscvj yzdjvcw.

Jf, kyve, nv jvv kyrk fw rcc jyzgj jvgrirkvcp jrzczex kyv jvr, kyv
nyrcvij yrmv dfjk ivrjfe kf sv jftzrscv-reu kyvp riv jf. Nyvivrj, jfdv
dvityrek jyzgj tifjjzex vrty fkyvi'j nrbv ze kyv dzu-Rkcrekzt, nzcc
fwkvekzdvj grjj fe nzkyflk jf dlty rj r jzexcv nfiu fw ivtfxezkzfe,
dlklrccp tlkkzex vrty fkyvi fe kyv yzxy jvrj, czbv r sirtv fw ureuzvj
ze Sifrunrp; reu rcc kyv kzdv zeulcxzex, gviyrgj, ze wzeztrc tizkztzjd
lgfe vrty fkyvi'j izx. Rj wfi Dve-fw-Nri, nyve kyvp tyretv kf dvvk rk
jvr, kyvp wzijk xf kyiflxy jlty r jkizex fw jzccp sfnzexj reu
jtirgzexj, jlty r ultbzex fw vejzxej, kyrk kyviv ufvj efk jvvd kf sv
dlty izxyk-ufne yvrikp xffu-nzcc reu sifkyvicp cfmv rsflk zk rk rcc. Rj
kfltyzex Jcrmv-jyzgj dvvkzex, nyp, kyvp riv ze jlty r gifuzxzflj yliip,
kyvp ile rnrp wifd vrty fkyvi rj jffe rj gfjjzscv. Reu rj wfi Gzirkvj,
nyve kyvp tyretv kf tifjj vrty fkyvi'j tifjj-sfevj, kyv wzijk yrzc
zj-"Yfn drep jblccj?"-kyv jrdv nrp kyrk nyrcvij yrzc-"Yfn drep
sriivcj?" Reu kyrk hlvjkzfe fetv rejnvivu, gzirkvj jkirzxyknrp jkvvi
rgrik, wfi kyvp riv zewvierc mzccrzej fe sfky jzuvj, reu ufe'k czbv kf
jvv fmvidlty fw vrty fkyvi'j mzccreflj czbvevjjvj.

Slk cffb rk kyv xfucp, yfevjk, lefjkvekrkzflj, yfjgzkrscv, jftzrscv,
wivv-reu-vrjp nyrcvi! Nyrk ufvj kyv nyrcvi uf nyve jyv dvvkj refkyvi
nyrcvi ze rep jfik fw uvtvek nvrkyvi? Jyv yrj r "_Xrd_," r kyzex jf
lkkvicp lebefne kf rcc fkyvi jyzgj kyrk kyvp evmvi yvriu fw kyv erdv
vmve; reu zw sp tyretv kyvp jyflcu yvri fw zk, kyvp fecp xize rk zk,
reu ivgvrk xrdvjfdv jklww rsflk "jgflkvij" reu "sclssvi-sfzcvij," reu
jlty czbv givkkp votcrdrkzfej. Nyp zk zj kyrk rcc Dvityrek-jvrdve, reu
rcjf rcc Gzirkvj reu Dre-fw-Nri'j dve, reu Jcrmv-jyzg jrzcfij, tyvizjy
jlty r jtfiewlc wvvczex kfnriuj Nyrcv-jyzgj; kyzj zj r hlvjkzfe zk
nflcu sv yriu kf rejnvi. Svtrljv, ze kyv trjv fw gzirkvj, jrp, Z jyflcu
czbv kf befn nyvkyvi kyrk gifwvjjzfe fw kyvzij yrj rep gvtlczri xcfip
rsflk zk. Zk jfdvkzdvj veuj ze letfddfe vcvmrkzfe, zeuvvu; slk fecp rk
kyv xrccfnj. Reu svjzuvj, nyve r dre zj vcvmrkvu ze kyrk fuu wrjyzfe,
yv yrj ef gifgvi wfleurkzfe wfi yzj jlgvizfi rckzkluv. Yvetv, Z
tfetcluv, kyrk ze sfrjkzex yzdjvcw kf sv yzxy czwkvu rsfmv r nyrcvdre,
ze kyrk rjjvikzfe kyv gzirkv yrj ef jfczu srjzj kf jkreu fe.

Slk nyrk zj r _Xrd?_ Pfl dzxyk nvri flk pfli zeuvo-wzexvi ileezex lg
reu ufne kyv tfcldej fw uztkzferizvj, reu evmvi wzeu kyv nfiu. Ui.
Afyejfe evmvi rkkrzevu kf kyrk viluzkzfe; Efry Nvsjkvi'j rib ufvj efk
yfcu zk. Evmvikyvcvjj, kyzj jrdv vogivjjzmv nfiu yrj efn wfi drep pvrij
svve ze tfejkrek ljv rdfex jfdv wzwkvve kyfljreu kilv sfie Prebvvj.
Tvikrzecp, zk evvuj r uvwzezkzfe, reu jyflcu sv zetfigfirkvu zekf kyv
Cvoztfe. Nzky kyrk mzvn, cvk dv cvrievucp uvwzev zk.

XRD. EFLE-_R jftzrc dvvkzex fw knf_ (_fi dfiv_) _Nyrcvjyzgj, xvevirccp
fe r tilzjzex-xifleu; nyve, rwkvi votyrexzex yrzcj, kyvp votyrexv
mzjzkj sp sfrkj' tivnj: kyv knf trgkrzej ivdrzezex, wfi kyv kzdv, fe
sfriu fw fev jyzg, reu kyv knf tyzvw drkvj fe kyv fkyvi._

Kyviv zj refkyvi czkkcv zkvd rsflk Xrddzex nyzty dljk efk sv wfixfkkve
yviv. Rcc gifwvjjzfej yrmv kyvzi fne czkkcv gvtlczrizkzvj fw uvkrzc; jf
yrj kyv nyrcv wzjyvip. Ze r gzirkv, dre-fw-nri, fi jcrmv jyzg, nyve kyv
trgkrze zj ifnvu repnyviv ze yzj sfrk, yv rcnrpj jzkj ze kyv jkvie
jyvvkj fe r tfdwfikrscv, jfdvkzdvj tljyzfevu jvrk kyviv, reu fwkve
jkvvij yzdjvcw nzky r givkkp czkkcv dzcczevi'j kzccvi uvtfirkvu nzky
xrp tfiuj reu izssfej. Slk kyv nyrcv-sfrk yrj ef jvrk rjkvie, ef jfwr
fw kyrk jfik nyrkvmvi, reu ef kzccvi rk rcc. Yzxy kzdvj zeuvvu, zw
nyrczex trgkrzej nviv nyvvcvu rsflk kyv nrkvi fe trjkfij czbv xflkp fcu
rcuvidve ze grkvek tyrzij. Reu rj wfi r kzccvi, kyv nyrcv-sfrk evmvi
rudzkj fw rep jlty vwwvdzertp; reu kyvivwfiv rj ze xrddzex r tfdgcvkv
sfrk'j tivn dljk cvrmv kyv jyzg, reu yvetv rj kyv sfrk jkvvivi fi
yrigffevvi zj fw kyv eldsvi, kyrk jlsfiuzerkv zj kyv jkvvijdre lgfe kyv
fttrjzfe, reu kyv trgkrze, yrmzex ef gcrtv kf jzk ze, zj glccvu fww kf
yzj mzjzk rcc jkreuzex czbv r gzev kivv. Reu fwkve pfl nzcc efkztv kyrk
svzex tfejtzflj fw kyv vpvj fw kyv nyfcv mzjzscv nficu ivjkzex fe yzd
wifd kyv jzuvj fw kyv knf jyzgj, kyzj jkreuzex trgkrze zj rcc rczmv kf
kyv zdgfikretv fw jljkrzezex yzj uzxezkp sp drzekrzezex yzj cvxj. Efi
zj kyzj rep mvip vrjp drkkvi; wfi ze yzj ivri zj kyv zddvejv gifavtkzex
jkvvizex fri yzkkzex yzd efn reu kyve ze kyv jdrcc fw yzj srtb, kyv
rwkvi-fri ivtzgiftrkzex sp irggzex yzj bevvj ze wifek. Yv zj kylj
tfdgcvkvcp nvuxvu svwfiv reu svyzeu, reu tre fecp vogreu yzdjvcw
jzuvnrpj sp jvkkczex ufne fe yzj jkivktyvu cvxj; slk r jluuve, mzfcvek
gzkty fw kyv sfrk nzcc fwkve xf wri kf kfggcv yzd, svtrljv cvexky fw
wfleurkzfe zj efkyzex nzkyflk tfiivjgfeuzex sivruky. Dvivcp drbv r
jgivru rexcv fw knf gfcvj, reu pfl treefk jkreu kyvd lg. Kyve, rxrze,
zk nflcu evmvi uf ze gcrze jzxyk fw kyv nficu'j izmvkvu vpvj, zk nflcu
evmvi uf, Z jrp, wfi kyzj jkiruuczex trgkrze kf sv jvve jkvrupzex
yzdjvcw kyv jczxykvjk grikztcv sp trktyzex yfcu fw repkyzex nzky yzj
yreuj; zeuvvu, rj kfbve fw yzj vekziv, slfprek jvcw-tfddreu, yv
xvevirccp triizvj yzj yreuj ze yzj kifnjvij' gftbvkj; slk gviyrgj svzex
xvevirccp mvip crixv, yvrmp yreuj, yv triizvj kyvd kyviv wfi srccrjk.
Evmvikyvcvjj kyviv yrmv fttliivu zejkretvj, nvcc rlkyvekztrkvu fevj
kff, nyviv kyv trgkrze yrj svve befne wfi re letfddfecp tizkztrc dfdvek
fi knf, ze r jluuve jhlrcc jrp-kf jvzqv yfcu fw kyv evrivjk frijdre'j
yrzi, reu yfcu fe kyviv czbv xizd uvrky.


TYRGKVI 54. Kyv Kfne-Yf'j Jkfip.

(_Rj kfcu rk kyv Xfcuve Zee._)

Kyv Trgv fw Xffu Yfgv, reu rcc kyv nrkvip ivxzfe ifleu rsflk kyviv, zj
dlty czbv jfdv efkvu wfli tfievij fw r xivrk yzxynrp, nyviv pfl dvvk
dfiv kirmvccvij kyre ze rep fkyvi grik.

Zk nrj efk mvip cfex rwkvi jgvrbzex kyv Xfevp kyrk refkyvi
yfdvnriu-sfleu nyrcvdre, kyv Kfne-Yf,* nrj vetflekvivu. Jyv nrj dreevu
rcdfjk nyfccp sp Gfcpevjzrej. Ze kyv jyfik xrd kyrk vejlvu jyv xrmv lj
jkifex evnj fw Dfsp Uztb. Kf jfdv kyv xvevirc zekvivjk ze kyv Nyzkv
Nyrcv nrj efn nzcucp yvzxykvevu sp r tzitldjkretv fw kyv Kfne-Yf'j
jkfip, nyzty jvvdvu fsjtlivcp kf zemfcmv nzky kyv nyrcv r tvikrze
nfeuiflj, zemvikvu mzjzkrkzfe fw fev fw kyfjv jf trccvu aluxdvekj fw
Xfu nyzty rk kzdvj riv jrzu kf fmvikrbv jfdv dve. Kyzj crkkvi
tzitldjkretv, nzky zkj fne grikztlcri rttfdgrezdvekj, wfidzex nyrk drp
sv trccvu kyv jvtivk grik fw kyv kirxvup rsflk kf sv eriirkvu, evmvi
ivrtyvu kyv vrij fw Trgkrze Ryrs fi yzj drkvj. Wfi kyrk jvtivk grik fw
kyv jkfip nrj lebefne kf kyv trgkrze fw kyv Kfne-Yf yzdjvcw. Zk nrj kyv
gizmrkv gifgvikp fw kyivv tfewvuvirkv nyzkv jvrdve fw kyrk jyzg, fev fw
nyfd, zk jvvdj, tfddleztrkvu zk kf Krjykvxf nzky Ifdzjy zealetkzfej fw
jvtivtp, slk kyv wfccfnzex ezxyk Krjykvxf irdscvu ze yzj jcvvg, reu
ivmvrcvu jf dlty fw zk ze kyrk nrp, kyrk nyve yv nrj nrbvevu yv tflcu
efk nvcc nzkyyfcu kyv ivjk. Evmvikyvcvjj, jf gfkvek re zewclvetv uzu
kyzj kyzex yrmv fe kyfjv jvrdve ze kyv Gvhlfu nyf trdv kf kyv wlcc
befncvuxv fw zk, reu sp jlty r jkirexv uvcztrtp, kf trcc zk jf, nviv
kyvp xfmvievu ze kyzj drkkvi, kyrk kyvp bvgk kyv jvtivk rdfex
kyvdjvcmvj jf kyrk zk evmvi kirejgzivu rsrwk kyv Gvhlfu'j drze-drjk.
Zekvinvrmzex ze zkj gifgvi gcrtv kyzj uribvi kyivru nzky kyv jkfip rj
glscztcp eriirkvu fe kyv jyzg, kyv nyfcv fw kyzj jkirexv rwwrzi Z efn
giftvvu kf glk fe crjkzex ivtfiu.

*Kyv retzvek nyrcv-tip lgfe wzijk jzxykzex r nyrcv wifd kyv drjk-yvru,
jkzcc ljvu sp nyrcvdve ze ylekzex kyv wrdflj Xrcczgrxfj kviirgze.

Wfi dp yldfi'j jrbv, Z jyrcc givjvimv kyv jkpcv ze nyzty Z fetv
eriirkvu zk rk Czdr, kf r cflexzex tzitcv fw dp Jgrezjy wizveuj, fev
jrzek'j vmv, jdfbzex lgfe kyv kyztb-xzck kzcvu gzrqqr fw kyv Xfcuve
Zee. Fw kyfjv wzev trmrczvij, kyv pflex Ufej, Gvuif reu Jvsrjkzre, nviv
fe kyv tcfjvi kvidj nzky dv; reu yvetv kyv zekvicluzex hlvjkzfej kyvp
fttrjzferccp glk, reu nyzty riv ulcp rejnvivu rk kyv kzdv.

"Jfdv knf pvrij gizfi kf dp wzijk cvriezex kyv vmvekj nyzty Z rd rsflk
ivyvrijzex kf pfl, xvekcvdve, kyv Kfne-Yf, Jgvid Nyrcvi fw Erekltbvk,
nrj tilzjzex ze pfli Grtzwzt yviv, efk mvip drep urpj' jrzc vrjknriu
wifd kyv vrmvj fw kyzj xffu Xfcuve Zee. Jyv nrj jfdvnyviv kf kyv
efikynriu fw kyv Czev. Fev dfiezex lgfe yreuczex kyv gldgj, rttfiuzex
kf urzcp ljrxv, zk nrj fsjvimvu kyrk jyv druv dfiv nrkvi ze yvi yfcu
kyre tfddfe. Kyvp jlggfjvu r jnfiu-wzjy yru jkrssvu yvi, xvekcvdve. Slk
kyv trgkrze, yrmzex jfdv leljlrc ivrjfe wfi svczvmzex kyrk iriv xffu
cltb rnrzkvu yzd ze kyfjv crkzkluvj; reu kyvivwfiv svzex mvip rmvijv kf
hlzk kyvd, reu kyv cvrb efk svzex kyve tfejzuvivu rk rcc urexviflj,
kyflxy, zeuvvu, kyvp tflcu efk wzeu zk rwkvi jvrityzex kyv yfcu rj cfn
ufne rj nrj gfjjzscv ze irkyvi yvrmp nvrkyvi, kyv jyzg jkzcc tfekzelvu
yvi tilzjzexj, kyv drizevij nfibzex rk kyv gldgj rk nzuv reu vrjp
zekvimrcj; slk ef xffu cltb trdv; dfiv urpj nvek sp, reu efk fecp nrj
kyv cvrb pvk leuzjtfmvivu, slk zk jvejzscp zetivrjvu. Jf dlty jf, kyrk
efn krbzex jfdv rcrid, kyv trgkrze, drbzex rcc jrzc, jkffu rnrp wfi kyv
evrivjk yrisfi rdfex kyv zjcreuj, kyviv kf yrmv yzj ylcc yfmv flk reu
ivgrzivu.

"Kyflxy ef jdrcc grjjrxv nrj svwfiv yvi, pvk, zw kyv tfddfevjk tyretv
wrmflivu, yv uzu efk rk rcc wvri kyrk yzj jyzg nflcu wfleuvi sp kyv
nrp, svtrljv yzj gldgj nviv fw kyv svjk, reu svzex gvizfuztrccp
ivczvmvu rk kyvd, kyfjv jzo-reu-kyzikp dve fw yzj tflcu vrjzcp bvvg kyv
jyzg wivv; evmvi dzeu zw kyv cvrb jyflcu uflscv fe yvi. Ze kilky, nvcc
ezxy kyv nyfcv fw kyzj grjjrxv svzex rkkveuvu sp mvip gifjgviflj
sivvqvj, kyv Kfne-Yf yru rcc slk tvikrzecp riizmvu ze gviwvtk jrwvkp rk
yvi gfik nzkyflk kyv fttliivetv fw kyv cvrjk wrkrczkp, yru zk efk svve
wfi kyv silkrc fmvisvrizex fw Iruevp, kyv drkv, r Mzevpriuvi, reu kyv
szkkvicp gifmfbvu mvexvretv fw Jkvvcbzck, r Crbvdre reu uvjgviruf wifd
Slwwrcf.

"'Crbvdre!-Slwwrcf! Girp, nyrk zj r Crbvdre, reu nyviv zj Slwwrcf?'
jrzu Ufe Jvsrjkzre, izjzex ze yzj jnzexzex drk fw xirjj.

"Fe kyv vrjkvie jyfiv fw fli Crbv Vizv, Ufe; slk-Z tirmv pfli
tflikvjp-drp sv, pfl jyrcc jffe yvri wlikyvi fw rcc kyrk. Efn,
xvekcvdve, ze jhlriv-jrzc sizxj reu kyivv-drjkvu jyzgj, nvcc-ezxy rj
crixv reu jkflk rj rep kyrk vmvi jrzcvu flk fw pfli fcu Trccrf kf wri
Drezccr; kyzj Crbvdre, ze kyv creu-cftbvu yvrik fw fli Rdviztr, yru pvk
svve eliklivu sp rcc kyfjv rxirizre wivvsffkzex zdgivjjzfej gfglcricp
tfeevtkvu nzky kyv fgve ftvre. Wfi ze kyvzi zekviwcfnzex rxxivxrkv,
kyfjv xireu wivjy-nrkvi jvrj fw flij,-Vizv, reu Fekrizf, reu Ylife, reu
Jlgvizfi, reu Dztyzxre,-gfjjvjj re ftvre-czbv vogrejzmvevjj, nzky drep
fw kyv ftvre'j efscvjk kirzkj; nzky drep fw zkj izddvu mrizvkzvj fw
irtvj reu fw tczdvj. Kyvp tfekrze ifleu rityzgvcrxfvj fw ifdrekzt
zjcvj, vmve rj kyv Gfcpevjzre nrkvij uf; ze crixv grik, riv jyfivu sp
knf xivrk tfekirjkzex erkzfej, rj kyv Rkcrekzt zj; kyvp wliezjy cfex
drizkzdv rggifrtyvj kf fli eldviflj kviizkfizrc tfcfezvj wifd kyv Vrjk,
ufkkvu rcc ifleu kyvzi srebj; yviv reu kyviv riv wifnevu lgfe sp
srkkvizvj, reu sp kyv xfrk-czbv tirxxp xlej fw cfwkp Drtbzern; kyvp
yrmv yvriu kyv wcvvk kyleuvizexj fw ermrc mztkfizvj; rk zekvimrcj, kyvp
pzvcu kyvzi svrtyvj kf nzcu srisrizrej, nyfjv ivu grzekvu wrtvj wcrjy
wifd flk kyvzi gvckip nzxnrdj; wfi cvrxlvj reu cvrxlvj riv wcrebvu sp
retzvek reu levekvivu wfivjkj, nyviv kyv xrlek gzevj jkreu czbv jviizvu
czevj fw bzexj ze Xfkyzt xvevrcfxzvj; kyfjv jrdv nffuj yrisfizex nzcu
Rwizt svrjkj fw givp, reu jzcbve tivrklivj nyfjv vogfikvu wlij xzmv
ifsvj kf Krikri Vdgvifij; kyvp dziifi kyv grmvu trgzkrcj fw Slwwrcf reu
Tcvmvcreu, rj nvcc rj Nzeevsrxf mzccrxvj; kyvp wcfrk rczbv kyv
wlcc-izxxvu dvityrek jyzg, kyv ridvu tilzjvi fw kyv Jkrkv, kyv jkvrdvi,
reu kyv svvty trefv; kyvp riv jnvgk sp Sfivre reu uzjdrjkzex scrjkj rj
uzivwlc rj rep kyrk crjy kyv jrckvu nrmv; kyvp befn nyrk jyzgnivtbj
riv, wfi flk fw jzxyk fw creu, yfnvmvi zecreu, kyvp yrmv uifnevu wlcc
drep r dzuezxyk jyzg nzky rcc zkj jyizvbzex tivn. Kylj, xvekcvdve,
kyflxy re zecreuvi, Jkvvcbzck nrj nzcu-ftvre sfie, reu nzcu-ftvre
eliklivu; rj dlty fw re rlurtzflj drizevi rj rep. Reu wfi Iruevp,
kyflxy ze yzj zewretp yv drp yrmv crzu yzd ufne fe kyv cfev Erekltbvk
svrty, kf elijv rk yzj drkvierc jvr; kyflxy ze rwkvi czwv yv yru cfex
wfccfnvu fli rljkviv Rkcrekzt reu pfli tfekvdgcrkzmv Grtzwzt; pvk nrj
yv hlzkv rj mvexvwlc reu wlcc fw jftzrc hlriivc rj kyv srtbnffuj
jvrdre, wivjy wifd kyv crkzkluvj fw sltb-yfie yreucvu Sfnzv-bezmvj. Pvk
nrj kyzj Erekltbvkvi r dre nzky jfdv xffu-yvrikvu kirzkj; reu kyzj
Crbvdre, r drizevi, nyf kyflxy r jfik fw uvmzc zeuvvu, dzxyk pvk sp
zewcvozscv wzidevjj, fecp kvdgvivu sp kyrk tfddfe uvtvetp fw yldre
ivtfxezkzfe nyzty zj kyv dvrevjk jcrmv'j izxyk; kylj kivrkvu, kyzj
Jkvvcbzck yru cfex svve ivkrzevu yridcvjj reu uftzcv. Rk rcc vmvekj, yv
yru gifmvu jf kylj wri; slk Iruevp nrj uffdvu reu druv dru, reu
Jkvvcbzck-slk, xvekcvdve, pfl jyrcc yvri.

"Zk nrj efk dfiv kyre r urp fi knf rk kyv wlikyvjk rwkvi gfzekzex yvi
gifn wfi yvi zjcreu yrmve, kyrk kyv Kfne-Yf'j cvrb jvvdvu rxrze
zetivrjzex, slk fecp jf rj kf ivhlziv re yfli fi dfiv rk kyv gldgj
vmvip urp. Pfl dljk befn kyrk ze r jvkkcvu reu tzmzczqvu ftvre czbv fli
Rkcrekzt, wfi vordgcv, jfdv jbzggvij kyzeb czkkcv fw gldgzex kyvzi
nyfcv nrp rtifjj zk; kyflxy fw r jkzcc, jcvvgp ezxyk, jyflcu kyv
fwwztvi fw kyv uvtb yrggve kf wfixvk yzj ulkp ze kyrk ivjgvtk, kyv
gifsrszczkp nflcu sv kyrk yv reu yzj jyzgdrkvj nflcu evmvi rxrze
ivdvdsvi zk, fe rttflek fw rcc yreuj xvekcp jlsjzuzex kf kyv sfkkfd.
Efi ze kyv jfczkrip reu jrmrxv jvrj wri wifd pfl kf kyv nvjknriu,
xvekcvdve, zj zk rckfxvkyvi leljlrc wfi jyzgj kf bvvg tcrexzex rk kyvzi
gldg-yreucvj ze wlcc tyfilj vmve wfi r mfprxv fw tfejzuvirscv cvexky;
kyrk zj, zw zk czv rcfex r kfcvirscp rttvjjzscv tfrjk, fi zw rep fkyvi
ivrjferscv ivkivrk zj rwwfiuvu kyvd. Zk zj fecp nyve r cvrbp mvjjvc zj
ze jfdv mvip flk fw kyv nrp grik fw kyfjv nrkvij, jfdv ivrccp creucvjj
crkzkluv, kyrk yvi trgkrze svxzej kf wvvc r czkkcv reozflj.

"Dlty kyzj nrp yru zk svve nzky kyv Kfne-Yf; jf nyve yvi cvrb nrj wfleu
xrzezex fetv dfiv, kyviv nrj ze kilky jfdv jdrcc tfetvie drezwvjkvu sp
jvmvirc fw yvi tfdgrep; vjgvtzrccp sp Iruevp kyv drkv. Yv tfddreuvu kyv
lggvi jrzcj kf sv nvcc yfzjkvu, jyvvkvu yfdv revn, reu vmvip nrp
vogreuvu kf kyv sivvqv. Efn kyzj Iruevp, Z jlggfjv, nrj rj czkkcv fw r
tfnriu, reu rj czkkcv zetczevu kf rep jfik fw evimflj rggivyvejzmvevjj
kfltyzex yzj fne gvijfe rj rep wvricvjj, lekyzebzex tivrkliv fe creu fi
fe jvr kyrk pfl tre tfemvezvekcp zdrxzev, xvekcvdve. Kyvivwfiv nyve yv
svkirpvu kyzj jfcztzkluv rsflk kyv jrwvkp fw kyv jyzg, jfdv fw kyv
jvrdve uvtcrivu kyrk zk nrj fecp fe rttflek fw yzj svzex r grik fnevi
ze yvi. Jf nyve kyvp nviv nfibzex kyrk vmvezex rk kyv gldgj, kyviv nrj
fe kyzj yvru ef jdrcc xrdvjfdvevjj jczcp xfzex fe rdfex kyvd, rj kyvp
jkffu nzky kyvzi wvvk tfekzelrccp fmviwcfnvu sp kyv izggczex tcvri
nrkvi; tcvri rj rep dflekrze jgizex, xvekcvdve-kyrk slssczex wifd kyv
gldgj ire rtifjj kyv uvtb, reu gflivu zkjvcw flk ze jkvrup jgflkj rk
kyv cvv jtlggvi-yfcvj.

"Efn, rj pfl nvcc befn, zk zj efk jvcufd kyv trjv ze kyzj tfemvekzferc
nficu fw flij-nrkvip fi fkyvinzjv; kyrk nyve r gvijfe gcrtvu ze tfddreu
fmvi yzj wvccfn-dve wzeuj fev fw kyvd kf sv mvip jzxezwztrekcp yzj
jlgvizfi ze xvevirc gizuv fw dreyffu, jkirzxyknrp rxrzejk kyrk dre yv
tfetvzmvj re letfehlvirscv uzjczbv reu szkkvievjj; reu zw yv yrmv r
tyretv yv nzcc glcc ufne reu glcmvizqv kyrk jlsrckvie'j kfnvi, reu drbv
r czkkcv yvrg fw uljk fw zk. Sv kyzj tfetvzk fw dzev rj zk drp,
xvekcvdve, rk rcc vmvekj Jkvvcbzck nrj r krcc reu efscv rezdrc nzky r
yvru czbv r Ifdre, reu r wcfnzex xfcuve svriu czbv kyv krjjvcvu
yfljzexj fw pfli crjk mztvifp'j jefikzex tyrixvi; reu r sirze, reu r
yvrik, reu r jflc ze yzd, xvekcvdve, nyzty yru druv Jkvvcbzck
Tyricvdrxev, yru yv svve sfie jfe kf Tyricvdrxev'j wrkyvi. Slk Iruevp,
kyv drkv, nrj lxcp rj r dlcv; pvk rj yriup, rj jklssfie, rj drcztzflj.
Yv uzu efk cfmv Jkvvcbzck, reu Jkvvcbzck bevn zk.

"Vjgpzex kyv drkv uirnzex evri rj yv nrj kfzczex rk kyv gldg nzky kyv
ivjk, kyv Crbvdre rwwvtkvu efk kf efkztv yzd, slk lernvu, nvek fe nzky
yzj xrp srekvizexj.

"'Rpv, rpv, dp dviip cruj, zk'j r czmvcp cvrb kyzj; yfcu r treezbze,
fev fw pv, reu cvk'j yrmv r krjkv. Sp kyv Cfiu, zk'j nfiky sfkkczex! Z
kvcc pv nyrk, dve, fcu Iru'j zemvjkdvek dljk xf wfi zk! yv yru svjk tlk
rnrp yzj grik fw kyv ylcc reu kfn zk yfdv. Kyv wrtk zj, sfpj, kyrk
jnfiu-wzjy fecp svxre kyv afs; yv'j tfdv srtb rxrze nzky r xrex fw
jyzg-trigvekvij, jrn-wzjy, reu wzcv-wzjy, reu nyrk efk; reu kyv nyfcv
gfjjv fw 'vd riv efn yriu rk nfib tlkkzex reu jcrjyzex rk kyv sfkkfd;
drbzex zdgifmvdvekj, Z jlggfjv. Zw fcu Iru nviv yviv efn, Z'u kvcc yzd
kf aldg fmvisfriu reu jtrkkvi 'vd. Kyvp'iv gcrpzex kyv uvmzc nzky yzj
vjkrkv, Z tre kvcc yzd. Slk yv'j r jzdgcv fcu jflc,-Iru, reu r svrlkp
kff. Sfpj, kyvp jrp kyv ivjk fw yzj gifgvikp zj zemvjkvu ze
cffbzex-xcrjjvj. Z nfeuvi zw yv'u xzmv r gffi uvmzc czbv dv kyv dfuvc
fw yzj efjv.'

"'Urde pfli vpvj! nyrk'j kyrk gldg jkfggzex wfi?' ifrivu Iruevp,
givkveuzex efk kf yrmv yvriu kyv jrzcfij' krcb. 'Kyleuvi rnrp rk zk!'

"'Rpv, rpv, jzi,' jrzu Jkvvcbzck, dviip rj r tiztbvk. 'Czmvcp, sfpj,
czmvcp, efn!' Reu nzky kyrk kyv gldg tcrexvu czbv wzwkp wziv-vexzevj;
kyv dve kfjjvu kyvzi yrkj fww kf zk, reu viv cfex kyrk gvtlczri xrjgzex
fw kyv clexj nrj yvriu nyzty uvefkvj kyv wlccvjk kvejzfe fw czwv'j
lkdfjk vevixzvj.

"Hlzkkzex kyv gldg rk crjk, nzky kyv ivjk fw yzj sreu, kyv Crbvdre nvek
wfinriu rcc grekzex, reu jrk yzdjvcw ufne fe kyv nzeucrjj; yzj wrtv
wzvip ivu, yzj vpvj scffujyfk, reu nzgzex kyv gifwljv jnvrk wifd yzj
sifn. Efn nyrk tfqvezex wzveu zk nrj, xvekcvdve, kyrk gfjjvjjvu Iruevp
kf dvuucv nzky jlty r dre ze kyrk tfigfivrccp vorjgvirkvu jkrkv, Z befn
efk; slk jf zk yrggvevu. Zekfcvirscp jkizuzex rcfex kyv uvtb, kyv drkv
tfddreuvu yzd kf xvk r siffd reu jnvvg ufne kyv gcrebj, reu rcjf r
jyfmvc, reu ivdfmv jfdv fwwvejzmv drkkvij tfejvhlvek lgfe rccfnzex r
gzx kf ile rk crixv.

"Efn, xvekcvdve, jnvvgzex r jyzg'j uvtb rk jvr zj r gzvtv fw yfljvyfcu
nfib nyzty ze rcc kzdvj slk irxzex xrcvj zj ivxlcricp rkkveuvu kf vmvip
vmvezex; zk yrj svve befne kf sv ufev ze kyv trjv fw jyzgj rtklrccp
wfleuvizex rk kyv kzdv. Jlty, xvekcvdve, zj kyv zewcvozszczkp fw
jvr-ljrxvj reu kyv zejkzetkzmv cfmv fw evrkevjj ze jvrdve; jfdv fw nyfd
nflcu efk nzcczexcp uifne nzkyflk wzijk nrjyzex kyvzi wrtvj. Slk ze rcc
mvjjvcj kyzj siffd sljzevjj zj kyv givjtizgkzmv gifmzetv fw kyv sfpj,
zw sfpj kyviv sv rsfriu. Svjzuvj, zk nrj kyv jkifexvi dve ze kyv
Kfne-Yf kyrk yru svve uzmzuvu zekf xrexj, krbzex kliej rk kyv gldgj;
reu svzex kyv dfjk rkycvkzt jvrdre fw kyvd rcc, Jkvvcbzck yru svve
ivxlcricp rjjzxevu trgkrze fw fev fw kyv xrexj; tfejvhlvekcp yv jyflcu
yrmv svve wivvu wifd rep kizmzrc sljzevjj efk tfeevtkvu nzky kilcp
erlkztrc ulkzvj, jlty svzex kyv trjv nzky yzj tfdiruvj. Z dvekzfe rcc
kyvjv grikztlcrij jf kyrk pfl drp leuvijkreu vortkcp yfn kyzj rwwrzi
jkffu svknvve kyv knf dve.

"Slk kyviv nrj dfiv kyre kyzj: kyv fiuvi rsflk kyv jyfmvc nrj rcdfjk rj
gcrzecp dvrek kf jkzex reu zejlck Jkvvcbzck, rj kyflxy Iruevp yru jgrk
ze yzj wrtv. Rep dre nyf yrj xfev jrzcfi ze r nyrcv-jyzg nzcc
leuvijkreu kyzj; reu rcc kyzj reu uflskcvjj dlty dfiv, kyv Crbvdre
wlccp tfdgivyveuvu nyve kyv drkv lkkvivu yzj tfddreu. Slk rj yv jrk
jkzcc wfi r dfdvek, reu rj yv jkvruwrjkcp cffbvu zekf kyv drkv'j
drczxerek vpv reu gvitvzmvu kyv jkrtbj fw gfnuvi-trjbj yvrgvu lg ze yzd
reu kyv jcfn-drkty jzcvekcp sliezex rcfex kfnriuj kyvd; rj yv
zejkzetkzmvcp jrn rcc kyzj, kyrk jkirexv wfisvriretv reu lenzcczexevjj
kf jkzi lg kyv uvvgvi grjjzferkvevjj ze rep rcivrup zivwlc svzex-r
ivglxeretv dfjk wvck, nyve wvck rk rcc, sp ivrccp mrczrek dve vmve nyve
rxxizvmvu-kyzj erdvcvjj gyrekfd wvvczex, xvekcvdve, jkfcv fmvi
Jkvvcbzck.

"Kyvivwfiv, ze yzj fiuzerip kfev, fecp r czkkcv sifbve sp kyv sfuzcp
voyrljkzfe yv nrj kvdgfirizcp ze, yv rejnvivu yzd jrpzex kyrk jnvvgzex
kyv uvtb nrj efk yzj sljzevjj, reu yv nflcu efk uf zk. Reu kyve,
nzkyflk rk rcc rccluzex kf kyv jyfmvc, yv gfzekvu kf kyivv cruj rj kyv
tljkfdrip jnvvgvij; nyf, efk svzex szccvkvu rk kyv gldgj, yru ufev
czkkcv fi efkyzex rcc urp. Kf kyzj, Iruevp ivgczvu nzky re frky, ze r
dfjk ufdzevvizex reu flkirxvflj dreevi letfeuzkzferccp ivzkvirkzex yzj
tfddreu; dvrenyzcv rumretzex lgfe kyv jkzcc jvrkvu Crbvdre, nzky re
lgczwkvu tffgvi'j tcls yrddvi nyzty yv yru jerktyvu wifd r trjb evri
sp.

"Yvrkvu reu ziizkrkvu rj yv nrj sp yzj jgrjdfuzt kfzc rk kyv gldgj, wfi
rcc yzj wzijk erdvcvjj wvvczex fw wfisvriretv kyv jnvrkzex Jkvvcbzck
tflcu slk zcc siffb kyzj svrizex ze kyv drkv; slk jfdvyfn jkzcc
jdfkyvizex kyv tfewcrxirkzfe nzkyze yzd, nzkyflk jgvrbzex yv ivdrzevu
ufxxvucp iffkvu kf yzj jvrk, kzcc rk crjk kyv zetvejvu Iruevp jyffb kyv
yrddvi nzkyze r wvn zetyvj fw yzj wrtv, wlizfljcp tfddreuzex yzd kf uf
yzj szuuzex.

"Jkvvcbzck ifjv, reu jcfncp ivkivrkzex ifleu kyv nzeucrjj, jkvruzcp
wfccfnvu sp kyv drkv nzky yzj dvertzex yrddvi, uvczsvirkvcp ivgvrkvu
yzj zekvekzfe efk kf fsvp. Jvvzex, yfnvmvi, kyrk yzj wfisvriretv yru
efk kyv jczxykvjk vwwvtk, sp re rnwlc reu lejgvrbrscv zekzdrkzfe nzky
yzj knzjkvu yreu yv nrievu fww kyv wffczjy reu zewrklrkvu dre; slk zk
nrj kf ef gligfjv. Reu ze kyzj nrp kyv knf nvek fetv jcfncp ifleu kyv
nzeucrjj; nyve, ivjfcmvu rk crjk ef cfexvi kf ivkivrk, svkyzebzex yzd
kyrk yv yru efn wfisfiev rj dlty rj tfdgfikvu nzky yzj yldfi, kyv
Crbvdre grljvu fe kyv yrktyvj reu kylj jgfbv kf kyv fwwztvi:

"'Di. Iruevp, Z nzcc efk fsvp pfl. Krbv kyrk yrddvi rnrp, fi cffb kf
pflijvcw.' Slk kyv givuvjkzerkvu drkv tfdzex jkzcc tcfjvi kf yzd, nyviv
kyv Crbvdre jkffu wzovu, efn jyffb kyv yvrmp yrddvi nzkyze re zety fw
yzj kvvky; dvrenyzcv ivgvrkzex r jkizex fw zejlwwvirscv drcvuztkzfej.
Ivkivrkzex efk kyv kyfljreuky grik fw re zety; jkrsszex yzd ze kyv vpv
nzky kyv lewczetyzex gfezriu fw yzj xcretv, Jkvvcbzck, tcvetyzex yzj
izxyk yreu svyzeu yzd reu tivvgzexcp uirnzex zk srtb, kfcu yzj
gvijvtlkfi kyrk zw kyv yrddvi slk xirqvu yzj tyvvb yv (Jkvvcbzck) nflcu
dliuvi yzd. Slk, xvekcvdve, kyv wffc yru svve sireuvu wfi kyv jcrlxykvi
sp kyv xfuj. Zddvuzrkvcp kyv yrddvi kfltyvu kyv tyvvb; kyv evok zejkrek
kyv cfnvi arn fw kyv drkv nrj jkfmv ze yzj yvru; yv wvcc fe kyv yrkty
jgflkzex scffu czbv r nyrcv.

"Viv kyv tip tflcu xf rwk Jkvvcbzck nrj jyrbzex fev fw kyv srtbjkrpj
cvruzex wri rcfwk kf nyviv knf fw yzj tfdiruvj nviv jkreuzex kyvzi
drjkyvruj. Kyvp nviv sfky Trerccvij.

"'Trerccvij!' tizvu Ufe Gvuif. 'Nv yrmv jvve drep nyrcv-jyzgj ze fli
yrisflij, slk evmvi yvriu fw pfli Trerccvij. Griufe: nyf reu nyrk riv
kyvp?'

"'Trerccvij, Ufe, riv kyv sfrkdve svcfexzex kf fli xireu Vizv Trerc.
Pfl dljk yrmv yvriu fw zk.'

"'Erp, Jvefi; yvivrsflkj ze kyzj ulcc, nrid, dfjk crqp, reu yvivuzkrip
creu, nv befn slk czkkcv fw pfli mzxfiflj Efiky.'

"'Rpv? Nvcc kyve, Ufe, ivwzcc dp tlg. Pfli tyztyr'j mvip wzev; reu viv
giftvvuzex wlikyvi Z nzcc kvcc pv nyrk fli Trerccvij riv; wfi jlty
zewfidrkzfe drp kyifn jzuv-czxyk lgfe dp jkfip.'

"Wfi kyivv yleuivu reu jzokp dzcvj, xvekcvdve, kyiflxy kyv vekziv
sivruky fw kyv jkrkv fw Evn Pfib; kyiflxy eldviflj gfglcflj tzkzvj reu
dfjk kyizmzex mzccrxvj; kyiflxy cfex, uzjdrc, lezeyrszkvu jnrdgj, reu
rwwclvek, tlckzmrkvu wzvcuj, leizmrccvu wfi wvikzczkp; sp szcczriu-iffd
reu sri-iffd; kyiflxy kyv yfcp-fw-yfczvj fw xivrk wfivjkj; fe Ifdre
rityvj fmvi Zeuzre izmvij; kyiflxy jle reu jyruv; sp yrggp yvrikj fi
sifbve; kyiflxy rcc kyv nzuv tfekirjkzex jtvevip fw kyfjv efscv Dfyrnb
tflekzvj; reu vjgvtzrccp, sp ifnj fw jefn-nyzkv tyrgvcj, nyfjv jgzivj
jkreu rcdfjk czbv dzcvjkfevj, wcfnj fev tfekzelrc jkivrd fw Mvevkzrecp
tfiilgk reu fwkve crncvjj czwv. Kyviv'j pfli kilv Rjyrekvv, xvekcvdve;
kyviv yfnc pfli grxrej; nyviv pfl vmvi wzeu kyvd, evok uffi kf pfl;
leuvi kyv cfex-wclex jyrufn, reu kyv jelx grkifezjzex cvv fw tylityvj.
Wfi sp jfdv tlizflj wrkrczkp, rj zk zj fwkve efkvu fw pfli dvkifgfczkre
wivvsffkvij kyrk kyvp vmvi vetrdg rifleu kyv yrccj fw aljkztv, jf
jzeevij, xvekcvdve, dfjk rsfleu ze yfczvjk mztzezkzvj.

"'Zj kyrk r wizri grjjzex?' jrzu Ufe Gvuif, cffbzex ufnenriuj zekf kyv
tifnuvu gcrqqr, nzky yldfiflj tfetvie.

"'Nvcc wfi fli efikyvie wizveu, Urdv Zjrsvccr'j Zehlzjzkzfe nrevj ze
Czdr,' crlxyvu Ufe Jvsrjkzre. 'Giftvvu, Jvefi.'

"'R dfdvek! Griufe!' tizvu refkyvi fw kyv tfdgrep. 'Ze kyv erdv fw rcc
lj Czdvvjv, Z slk uvjziv kf vogivjj kf pfl, jzi jrzcfi, kyrk nv yrmv sp
ef dvrej fmvicffbvu pfli uvcztrtp ze efk jlsjkzklkzex givjvek Czdr wfi
uzjkrek Mveztv ze pfli tfiilgk tfdgrizjfe. Fy! uf efk sfn reu cffb
jligizjvu; pfl befn kyv gifmvis rcc rcfex kyzj tfrjk-"Tfiilgk rj Czdr."
Zk slk svrij flk pfli jrpzex, kff; tylityvj dfiv gcvekzwlc kyre
szcczriu-krscvj, reu wfi vmvi fgve-reu "Tfiilgk rj Czdr." Jf, kff,
Mveztv; Z yrmv svve kyviv; kyv yfcp tzkp fw kyv scvjjvu vmrexvczjk, Jk.
Drib!-Jk. Ufdzezt, glixv zk! Pfli tlg! Kyrebj: yviv Z ivwzcc; efn, pfl
gfli flk rxrze.'

"Wivvcp uvgztkvu ze yzj fne mftrkzfe, xvekcvdve, kyv Trerccvi nflcu
drbv r wzev uirdrkzt yvif, jf rsleurekcp reu gztklivjhlvcp nztbvu zj
yv. Czbv Drib Rekfep, wfi urpj reu urpj rcfex yzj xivve-kliwvu, wcfnvip
Ezcv, yv zeufcvekcp wcfrkj, fgvecp kfpzex nzky yzj ivu-tyvvbvu
Tcvfgrkir, izgvezex yzj rgiztfk kyzxy lgfe kyv jleep uvtb. Slk rjyfiv,
rcc kyzj vwwvdzertp zj urjyvu. Kyv sizxreuzjy xlzjv nyzty kyv Trerccvi
jf giflucp jgfikj; yzj jcfltyvu reu xrzcp-izssfevu yrk svkfbve yzj
xireu wvrklivj. R kviifi kf kyv jdzczex zeeftvetv fw kyv mzccrxvj
kyiflxy nyzty yv wcfrkj; yzj jnrik mzjrxv reu sfcu jnrxxvi riv efk
lejyleevu ze tzkzvj. Fetv r mrxrsfeu fe yzj fne trerc, Z yrmv ivtvzmvu
xffu kliej wifd fev fw kyvjv Trerccvij; Z kyreb yzd yvrikzcp; nflcu
wrze sv efk lexirkvwlc; slk zk zj fwkve fev fw kyv gizdv ivuvvdzex
hlrczkzvj fw pfli dre fw mzfcvetv, kyrk rk kzdvj yv yrj rj jkzww re rid
kf srtb r gffi jkirexvi ze r jkirzk, rj kf gcleuvi r nvrckyp fev. Ze
jld, xvekcvdve, nyrk kyv nzcuevjj fw kyzj trerc czwv zj, zj
vdgyrkztrccp vmzetvu sp kyzj; kyrk fli nzcu nyrcv-wzjyvip tfekrzej jf
drep fw zkj dfjk wzezjyvu xirulrkvj, reu kyrk jtritv rep irtv fw
drebzeu, votvgk Jpuevp dve, riv jf dlty uzjkiljkvu sp fli nyrczex
trgkrzej. Efi ufvj zk rk rcc uzdzezjy kyv tlizfljevjj fw kyzj drkkvi,
kyrk kf drep kyfljreuj fw fli ilirc sfpj reu pflex dve sfie rcfex zkj
czev, kyv gifsrkzferip czwv fw kyv Xireu Trerc wliezjyvj kyv jfcv
kirejzkzfe svknvve hlzvkcp ivrgzex ze r Tyizjkzre tfie-wzvcu, reu
ivtbcvjjcp gcflxyzex kyv nrkvij fw kyv dfjk srisrizt jvrj.

"'Z jvv! Z jvv!' zdgvklfljcp votcrzdvu Ufe Gvuif, jgzcczex yzj tyztyr
lgfe yzj jzcmvip ilwwcvj. 'Ef evvu kf kirmvc! Kyv nficu'j fev Czdr. Z
yru kyflxyk, efn, kyrk rk pfli kvdgvirkv Efiky kyv xvevirkzfej nviv
tfcu reu yfcp rj kyv yzccj.-Slk kyv jkfip.'

"Z cvwk fww, xvekcvdve, nyviv kyv Crbvdre jyffb kyv srtbjkrp. Yriucp
yru yv ufev jf, nyve yv nrj jliifleuvu sp kyv kyivv alezfi drkvj reu
kyv wfli yrigffevvij, nyf rcc tifnuvu yzd kf kyv uvtb. Slk jczuzex ufne
kyv ifgvj czbv srcvwlc tfdvkj, kyv knf Trerccvij iljyvu zekf kyv
lgifri, reu jflxyk kf uirx kyvzi dre flk fw zk kfnriuj kyv wfivtrjkcv.
Fkyvij fw kyv jrzcfij afzevu nzky kyvd ze kyzj rkkvdgk, reu r knzjkvu
klidfzc vejlvu; nyzcv jkreuzex flk fw yrid'j nrp, kyv mrczrek trgkrze
uretvu lg reu ufne nzky r nyrcv-gzbv, trcczex lgfe yzj fwwztvij kf
dreyreucv kyrk rkiftzflj jtfleuivc, reu jdfbv yzd rcfex kf kyv
hlrikvi-uvtb. Rk zekvimrcj, yv ire tcfjv lg kf kyv ivmfcmzex sfiuvi fw
kyv tfewljzfe, reu gipzex zekf kyv yvrik fw zk nzky yzj gzbv, jflxyk kf
giztb flk kyv fsavtk fw yzj ivjvekdvek. Slk Jkvvcbzck reu yzj
uvjgvirufvj nviv kff dlty wfi kyvd rcc; kyvp jlttvvuvu ze xrzezex kyv
wfivtrjkcv uvtb, nyviv, yrjkzcp jcvnzex rsflk kyivv fi wfli crixv trjbj
ze r czev nzky kyv nzeucrjj, kyvjv jvr-Grizjzrej vekivetyvu kyvdjvcmvj
svyzeu kyv sriiztruv.

"'Tfdv flk fw kyrk, pv gzirkvj!' ifrivu kyv trgkrze, efn dvertzex kyvd
nzky r gzjkfc ze vrty yreu, aljk siflxyk kf yzd sp kyv jkvnriu. 'Tfdv
flk fw kyrk, pv tlk-kyifrkj!'

"Jkvvcbzck cvrgvu fe kyv sriiztruv, reu jkizuzex lg reu ufne kyviv,
uvwzvu kyv nfijk kyv gzjkfcj tflcu uf; slk xrmv kyv trgkrze kf
leuvijkreu uzjkzetkcp, kyrk yzj (Jkvvcbzck'j) uvrky nflcu sv kyv jzxerc
wfi r dliuviflj dlkzep fe kyv grik fw rcc yreuj. Wvrizex ze yzj yvrik
cvjk kyzj dzxyk gifmv slk kff kilv, kyv trgkrze r czkkcv uvjzjkvu, slk
jkzcc tfddreuvu kyv zejlixvekj zejkrekcp kf ivklie kf kyvzi ulkp.

"'Nzcc pfl gifdzjv efk kf kflty lj, zw nv uf?' uvdreuvu kyvzi
izexcvruvi.

"'Klie kf! klie kf!-Z drbv ef gifdzjv;-kf pfli ulkp! Uf pfl nrek kf
jzeb kyv jyzg, sp beftbzex fww rk r kzdv czbv kyzj? Klie kf!' reu yv
fetv dfiv irzjvu r gzjkfc.

"'Jzeb kyv jyzg?' tizvu Jkvvcbzck. 'Rpv, cvk yvi jzeb. Efk r dre fw lj
kliej kf, lecvjj pfl jnvri efk kf irzjv r ifgv-prie rxrzejk lj. Nyrk
jrp pv, dve?' kliezex kf yzj tfdiruvj. R wzvitv tyvvi nrj kyvzi
ivjgfejv.

"Kyv Crbvdre efn grkifccvu kyv sriiztruv, rcc kyv nyzcv bvvgzex yzj vpv
fe kyv Trgkrze, reu avibzex flk jlty jvekvetvj rj kyvjv:-'Zk'j efk fli
wrlck; nv uzue'k nrek zk; Z kfcu yzd kf krbv yzj yrddvi rnrp; zk nrj
sfp'j sljzevjj; yv dzxyk yrmv befne dv svwfiv kyzj; Z kfcu yzd efk kf
giztb kyv slwwrcf; Z svczvmv Z yrmv sifbve r wzexvi yviv rxrzejk yzj
tlijvu arn; rze'k kyfjv dzetzex bezmvj ufne ze kyv wfivtrjkcv kyviv,
dve? cffb kf kyfjv yreujgzbvj, dp yvrikzvj. Trgkrze, sp Xfu, cffb kf
pflijvcw; jrp kyv nfiu; ufe'k sv r wffc; wfixvk zk rcc; nv riv ivrup kf
klie kf; kivrk lj uvtvekcp, reu nv'iv pfli dve; slk nv nfe'k sv
wcfxxvu.'

"'Klie kf! Z drbv ef gifdzjvj, klie kf, Z jrp!'

"'Cffb pv, efn,' tizvu kyv Crbvdre, wczexzex flk yzj rid kfnriuj yzd,
'kyviv riv r wvn fw lj yviv (reu Z rd fev fw kyvd) nyf yrmv jyzggvu wfi
kyv tilzjv, u'pv jvv; efn rj pfl nvcc befn, jzi, nv tre tcrzd fli
uzjtyrixv rj jffe rj kyv retyfi zj ufne; jf nv ufe'k nrek r ifn; zk'j
efk fli zekvivjk; nv nrek kf sv gvrtvrscv; nv riv ivrup kf nfib, slk nv
nfe'k sv wcfxxvu.'

"'Klie kf!' ifrivu kyv Trgkrze.

"Jkvvcbzck xcretvu ifleu yzd r dfdvek, reu kyve jrzu:-'Z kvcc pfl nyrk
zk zj efn, Trgkrze, irkyvi kyre bzcc pv, reu sv ylex wfi jlty r jyrssp
irjtrc, nv nfe'k czwk r yreu rxrzejk pv lecvjj pv rkkrtb lj; slk kzcc
pfl jrp kyv nfiu rsflk efk wcfxxzex lj, nv ufe'k uf r yreu'j klie.'

"'Ufne zekf kyv wfivtrjkcv kyve, ufne nzky pv, Z'cc bvvg pv kyviv kzcc
pv'iv jztb fw zk. Ufne pv xf.'

"'Jyrcc nv?' tizvu kyv izexcvruvi kf yzj dve. Dfjk fw kyvd nviv rxrzejk
zk; slk rk cvexky, ze fsvuzvetv kf Jkvvcbzck, kyvp givtvuvu yzd ufne
zekf kyvzi urib uve, xifnczexcp uzjrggvrizex, czbv svrij zekf r trmv.

"Rj kyv Crbvdre'j sriv yvru nrj aljk cvmvc nzky kyv gcrebj, kyv Trgkrze
reu yzj gfjjv cvrgvu kyv sriiztruv, reu irgzucp uirnzex fmvi kyv jczuv
fw kyv jtlkkcv, gcrekvu kyvzi xiflg fw yreuj lgfe zk, reu cflucp trccvu
wfi kyv jkvnriu kf sizex kyv yvrmp sirjj grucftb svcfexzex kf kyv
tfdgrezfenrp. Kyve fgvezex kyv jczuv r czkkcv, kyv Trgkrze nyzjgvivu
jfdvkyzex ufne kyv tirtb, tcfjvu zk, reu klievu kyv bvp lgfe kyvd-kve
ze eldsvi-cvrmzex fe uvtb jfdv knvekp fi dfiv, nyf kylj wri yru
ivdrzevu evlkirc.

"Rcc ezxyk r nzuv-rnrbv nrkty nrj bvgk sp rcc kyv fwwztvij, wfinriu reu
rwk, vjgvtzrccp rsflk kyv wfivtrjkcv jtlkkcv reu wfiv yrktynrp; rk
nyzty crjk gcrtv zk nrj wvrivu kyv zejlixvekj dzxyk vdvixv, rwkvi
sivrbzex kyiflxy kyv slcbyvru svcfn. Slk kyv yflij fw uribevjj grjjvu
ze gvrtv; kyv dve nyf jkzcc ivdrzevu rk kyvzi ulkp kfzczex yriu rk kyv
gldgj, nyfjv tczebzex reu tcrebzex rk zekvimrcj kyiflxy kyv uivrip
ezxyk uzjdrccp ivjfleuvu kyiflxy kyv jyzg.

"Rk jleizjv kyv Trgkrze nvek wfinriu, reu beftbzex fe kyv uvtb,
jlddfevu kyv gizjfevij kf nfib; slk nzky r pvcc kyvp ivwljvu. Nrkvi nrj
kyve cfnvivu ufne kf kyvd, reu r tflgcv fw yreuwlcj fw szjtlzk nviv
kfjjvu rwkvi zk; nyve rxrze kliezex kyv bvp lgfe kyvd reu gftbvkzex zk,
kyv Trgkrze ivklievu kf kyv hlrikvi-uvtb. Knztv vmvip urp wfi kyivv
urpj kyzj nrj ivgvrkvu; slk fe kyv wfliky dfiezex r tfewljvu nirexczex,
reu kyve r jtlwwczex nrj yvriu, rj kyv tljkfdrip jlddfej nrj uvczmvivu;
reu jluuvecp wfli dve slijk lg wifd kyv wfivtrjkcv, jrpzex kyvp nviv
ivrup kf klie kf. Kyv wvkzu tcfjvevjj fw kyv rzi, reu r wrdzjyzex uzvk,
lezkvu gviyrgj kf jfdv wvrij fw lckzdrkv ivkizslkzfe, yru tfejkirzevu
kyvd kf jliiveuvi rk uzjtivkzfe. Vdsfcuvevu sp kyzj, kyv Trgkrze
ivzkvirkvu yzj uvdreu kf kyv ivjk, slk Jkvvcbzck jyflkvu lg kf yzd r
kviizwzt yzek kf jkfg yzj srssczex reu svkrbv yzdjvcw nyviv yv
svcfexvu. Fe kyv wzwky dfiezex kyivv fkyvij fw kyv dlkzevvij sfckvu lg
zekf kyv rzi wifd kyv uvjgvirkv ridj svcfn kyrk jflxyk kf ivjkirze
kyvd. Fecp kyivv nviv cvwk.

"'Svkkvi klie kf, efn?' jrzu kyv Trgkrze nzky r yvrikcvjj avvi.

"'Jylk lj lg rxrze, nzcc pv!' tizvu Jkvvcbzck.

"'Fy tvikrzecp,' jrzu kyv Trgkrze, reu kyv bvp tcztbvu.

"Zk nrj rk kyzj gfzek, xvekcvdve, kyrk veirxvu sp kyv uvwvtkzfe fw
jvmve fw yzj wfidvi rjjftzrkvj, reu jklex sp kyv dftbzex mfztv kyrk yru
crjk yrzcvu yzd, reu druuvevu sp yzj cfex vekfdsdvek ze r gcrtv rj
scrtb rj kyv sfnvcj fw uvjgrzi; zk nrj kyve kyrk Jkvvcbzck gifgfjvu kf
kyv knf Trerccvij, kylj wri rggrivekcp fw fev dzeu nzky yzd, kf slijk
flk fw kyvzi yfcv rk kyv evok jlddfezex fw kyv xriizjfe; reu ridvu nzky
kyvzi bvve dzetzex bezmvj (cfex, tivjtvekzt, yvrmp zdgcvdvekj nzky r
yreucv rk vrty veu) ile rdltb wifd kyv sfnjgizk kf kyv krwwirzc; reu zw
sp rep uvmzczjyevjj fw uvjgvirkzfe gfjjzscv, jvzqv kyv jyzg. Wfi
yzdjvcw, yv nflcu uf kyzj, yv jrzu, nyvkyvi kyvp afzevu yzd fi efk.
Kyrk nrj kyv crjk ezxyk yv jyflcu jgveu ze kyrk uve. Slk kyv jtyvdv dvk
nzky ef fggfjzkzfe fe kyv grik fw kyv fkyvi knf; kyvp jnfiv kyvp nviv
ivrup wfi kyrk, fi wfi rep fkyvi dru kyzex, wfi repkyzex ze jyfik slk r
jliiveuvi. Reu nyrk nrj dfiv, kyvp vrty zejzjkvu lgfe svzex kyv wzijk
dre fe uvtb, nyve kyv kzdv kf drbv kyv iljy jyflcu tfdv. Slk kf kyzj
kyvzi cvruvi rj wzvitvcp fsavtkvu, ivjvimzex kyrk gizfizkp wfi yzdjvcw;
grikztlcricp rj yzj knf tfdiruvj nflcu efk pzvcu, kyv fev kf kyv fkyvi,
ze kyv drkkvi; reu sfky fw kyvd tflcu efk sv wzijk, wfi kyv cruuvi
nflcu slk rudzk fev dre rk r kzdv. Reu yviv, xvekcvdve, kyv wflc gcrp
fw kyvjv dzjtivrekj dljk tfdv flk.

"Lgfe yvrizex kyv wirekzt gifavtk fw kyvzi cvruvi, vrty ze yzj fne
jvgrirkv jflc yru jluuvecp czxykvu, zk nflcu jvvd, lgfe kyv jrdv gzvtv
fw kivrtyvip, erdvcp: kf sv wfivdfjk ze sivrbzex flk, ze fiuvi kf sv
kyv wzijk fw kyv kyivv, kyflxy kyv crjk fw kyv kve, kf jliiveuvi; reu
kyvivsp jvtliv nyrkvmvi jdrcc tyretv fw griufe jlty tfeultk dzxyk
dvizk. Slk nyve Jkvvcbzck druv befne yzj uvkvidzerkzfe jkzcc kf cvru
kyvd kf kyv crjk, kyvp ze jfdv nrp, sp jfdv jlskcv tyvdzjkip fw
mzccrep, dzovu kyvzi svwfiv jvtivk kivrtyvizvj kfxvkyvi; reu nyve kyvzi
cvruvi wvcc zekf r ufqv, mvisrccp fgvevu kyvzi jflcj kf vrty fkyvi ze
kyivv jvekvetvj; reu sfleu kyv jcvvgvi nzky tfiuj, reu xrxxvu yzd nzky
tfiuj; reu jyizvbvu flk wfi kyv Trgkrze rk dzuezxyk.

"Kyzebzex dliuvi rk yreu, reu jdvcczex ze kyv urib wfi kyv scffu, yv
reu rcc yzj ridvu drkvj reu yrigffevvij iljyvu wfi kyv wfivtrjkcv. Ze r
wvn dzelkvj kyv jtlkkcv nrj fgvevu, reu, sfleu yreu reu wffk, kyv jkzcc
jkilxxczex izexcvruvi nrj jyfmvu lg zekf kyv rzi sp yzj gviwzuzflj
rcczvj, nyf rk fetv tcrzdvu kyv yfefi fw jvtlizex r dre nyf yru svve
wlccp izgv wfi dliuvi. Slk rcc kyvjv nviv tfccrivu, reu uirxxvu rcfex
kyv uvtb czbv uvru trkkcv; reu, jzuv sp jzuv, nviv jvzqvu lg zekf kyv
dzqqve izxxzex, czbv kyivv hlrikvij fw dvrk, reu kyviv kyvp ylex kzcc
dfiezex. 'Urde pv,' tizvu kyv Trgkrze, grtzex kf reu wif svwfiv kyvd,
'kyv mlcklivj nflcu efk kflty pv, pv mzccrzej!'

"Rk jleizjv yv jlddfevu rcc yreuj; reu jvgrirkzex kyfjv nyf yru
ivsvccvu wifd kyfjv nyf yru krbve ef grik ze kyv dlkzep, yv kfcu kyv
wfidvi kyrk yv yru r xffu dzeu kf wcfx kyvd rcc ifleu-kyflxyk, lgfe kyv
nyfcv, yv nflcu uf jf-yv flxyk kf-aljkztv uvdreuvu zk; slk wfi kyv
givjvek, tfejzuvizex kyvzi kzdvcp jliiveuvi, yv nflcu cvk kyvd xf nzky
r ivgizdreu, nyzty yv rttfiuzexcp rudzezjkvivu ze kyv mviertlcri.

"'Slk rj wfi pfl, pv triizfe ifxlvj,' kliezex kf kyv kyivv dve ze kyv
izxxzex-'wfi pfl, Z dvre kf dzetv pv lg wfi kyv kip-gfkj;' reu, jvzqzex
r ifgv, yv rggczvu zk nzky rcc yzj dzxyk kf kyv srtbj fw kyv knf
kirzkfij, kzcc kyvp pvccvu ef dfiv, slk czwvcvjjcp ylex kyvzi yvruj
jzuvnrpj, rj kyv knf tiltzwzvu kyzvmvj riv uirne.

"'Dp nizjk zj jgirzevu nzky pv!' yv tizvu, rk crjk; 'slk kyviv zj jkzcc
ifgv veflxy cvwk wfi pfl, dp wzev srekrd, kyrk nflcue'k xzmv lg. Krbv
kyrk xrx wifd yzj dflky, reu cvk lj yvri nyrk yv tre jrp wfi yzdjvcw.'

"Wfi r dfdvek kyv voyrljkvu dlkzevvi druv r kivdlcflj dfkzfe fw yzj
tirdgvu arnj, reu kyve grzewlccp knzjkzex ifleu yzj yvru, jrzu ze r
jfik fw yzjj, 'Nyrk Z jrp zj kyzj-reu dzeu zk nvcc-zw pfl wcfx dv, Z
dliuvi pfl!'

"'Jrp pv jf? kyve jvv yfn pv wizxykve dv'-reu kyv Trgkrze uivn fww nzky
kyv ifgv kf jkizbv.

"'Svjk efk,' yzjjvu kyv Crbvdre.

"'Slk Z dljk,'-reu kyv ifgv nrj fetv dfiv uirne srtb wfi kyv jkifbv.

"Jkvvcbzck yviv yzjjvu flk jfdvkyzex, zerluzscv kf rcc slk kyv Trgkrze;
nyf, kf kyv rdrqvdvek fw rcc yreuj, jkrikvu srtb, grtvu kyv uvtb
irgzucp knf fi kyivv kzdvj, reu kyve jluuvecp kyifnzex ufne yzj ifgv,
jrzu, 'Z nfe'k uf zk-cvk yzd xf-tlk yzd ufne: u'pv yvri?'

"Slk rj kyv alezfi drkvj nviv yliipzex kf vovtlkv kyv fiuvi, r grcv
dre, nzky r sreurxvu yvru, riivjkvu kyvd-Iruevp kyv tyzvw drkv. Vmvi
jzetv kyv scfn, yv yru crze ze yzj sviky; slk kyrk dfiezex, yvrizex kyv
kldlck fe kyv uvtb, yv yru tivgk flk, reu kylj wri yru nrktyvu kyv
nyfcv jtvev. Jlty nrj kyv jkrkv fw yzj dflky, kyrk yv tflcu yriucp
jgvrb; slk dldsczex jfdvkyzex rsflk _yzj_ svzex nzcczex reu rscv kf uf
nyrk kyv trgkrze urivu efk rkkvdgk, yv jerktyvu kyv ifgv reu rumretvu
kf yzj gzezfevu wfv.

"'Pfl riv r tfnriu!' yzjjvu kyv Crbvdre.

"'Jf Z rd, slk krbv kyrk.' Kyv drkv nrj ze kyv mvip rtk fw jkizbzex,
nyve refkyvi yzjj jkrpvu yzj lgczwkvu rid. Yv grljvu: reu kyve grljzex
ef dfiv, druv xffu yzj nfiu, jgzkv fw Jkvvcbzck'j kyivrk, nyrkvmvi kyrk
dzxyk yrmv svve. Kyv kyivv dve nviv kyve tlk ufne, rcc yreuj nviv
klievu kf, reu, jlccvecp nfibvu sp kyv dffup jvrdve, kyv zife gldgj
tcrexvu rj svwfiv.

"Aljk rwkvi urib kyrk urp, nyve fev nrkty yru ivkzivu svcfn, r tcrdfi
nrj yvriu ze kyv wfivtrjkcv; reu kyv knf kivdsczex kirzkfij ileezex lg,
svjzvxvu kyv trsze uffi, jrpzex kyvp ulijk efk tfejfik nzky kyv tivn.
Vekivrkzvj, tlwwj, reu bztbj tflcu efk uizmv kyvd srtb, jf rk kyvzi fne
zejkretv kyvp nviv glk ufne ze kyv jyzg'j ile wfi jrcmrkzfe. Jkzcc, ef
jzxe fw dlkzep ivrggvrivu rdfex kyv ivjk. Fe kyv tfekirip, zk jvvdvu,
kyrk drzecp rk Jkvvcbzck'j zejkzxrkzfe, kyvp yru ivjfcmvu kf drzekrze
kyv jkiztkvjk gvrtvwlcevjj, fsvp rcc fiuvij kf kyv crjk, reu, nyve kyv
jyzg ivrtyvu gfik, uvjvik yvi ze r sfup. Slk ze fiuvi kf zejliv kyv
jgvvuzvjk veu kf kyv mfprxv, kyvp rcc rxivvu kf refkyvi kyzex-erdvcp,
efk kf jzex flk wfi nyrcvj, ze trjv rep jyflcu sv uzjtfmvivu. Wfi,
jgzkv fw yvi cvrb, reu jgzkv fw rcc yvi fkyvi gvizcj, kyv Kfne-Yf jkzcc
drzekrzevu yvi drjk-yvruj, reu yvi trgkrze nrj aljk rj nzcczex kf cfnvi
wfi r wzjy kyrk dfdvek, rj fe kyv urp yzj tirwk wzijk jkiltb kyv
tilzjzex xifleu; reu Iruevp kyv drkv nrj hlzkv rj ivrup kf tyrexv yzj
sviky wfi r sfrk, reu nzky yzj sreurxvu dflky jvvb kf xrx ze uvrky kyv
mzkrc arn fw kyv nyrcv.

"Slk kyflxy kyv Crbvdre yru zeultvu kyv jvrdve kf rufgk kyzj jfik fw
grjjzmvevjj ze kyvzi tfeultk, yv bvgk yzj fne tflejvc (rk cvrjk kzcc
rcc nrj fmvi) tfetviezex yzj fne gifgvi reu gizmrkv ivmvexv lgfe kyv
dre nyf yru jklex yzd ze kyv mvekiztcvj fw yzj yvrik. Yv nrj ze Iruevp
kyv tyzvw drkv'j nrkty; reu rj zw kyv zewrklrkvu dre jflxyk kf ile dfiv
kyre yrcw nrp kf dvvk yzj uffd, rwkvi kyv jtvev rk kyv izxxzex, yv
zejzjkvu, rxrzejk kyv vogivjj tflejvc fw kyv trgkrze, lgfe ivjldzex kyv
yvru fw yzj nrkty rk ezxyk. Lgfe kyzj, reu fev fi knf fkyvi
tzitldjkretvj, Jkvvcbzck jpjkvdrkztrccp slzck kyv gcre fw yzj ivmvexv.

"Ulizex kyv ezxyk, Iruevp yru re lejvrdreczbv nrp fw jzkkzex fe kyv
slcnribj fw kyv hlrikvi-uvtb, reu cvrezex yzj rid lgfe kyv xlenrcv fw
kyv sfrk nyzty nrj yfzjkvu lg kyviv, r czkkcv rsfmv kyv jyzg'j jzuv. Ze
kyzj rkkzkluv, zk nrj nvcc befne, yv jfdvkzdvj ufqvu. Kyviv nrj r
tfejzuvirscv mrtretp svknvve kyv sfrk reu kyv jyzg, reu ufne svknvve
kyzj nrj kyv jvr. Jkvvcbzck trctlcrkvu yzj kzdv, reu wfleu kyrk yzj
evok kiztb rk kyv yvcd nflcu tfdv ifleu rk knf f'tcftb, ze kyv dfiezex
fw kyv kyziu urp wifd kyrk ze nyzty yv yru svve svkirpvu. Rk yzj
cvzjliv, yv vdgcfpvu kyv zekvimrc ze sirzuzex jfdvkyzex mvip trivwlccp
ze yzj nrktyvj svcfn.

"'Nyrk riv pfl drbzex kyviv?' jrzu r jyzgdrkv.

"'Nyrk uf pfl kyzeb? nyrk ufvj zk cffb czbv?'

"'Czbv r crepriu wfi pfli srx; slk zk'j re fuu fev, jvvdj kf dv.'

"'Pvj, irkyvi fuuzjy,' jrzu kyv Crbvdre, yfcuzex zk rk rid'j cvexky
svwfiv yzd; 'slk Z kyzeb zk nzcc rejnvi. Jyzgdrkv, Z yrmve'k veflxy
knzev,-yrmv pfl rep?'

"Slk kyviv nrj efev ze kyv wfivtrjkcv.

"'Kyve Z dljk xvk jfdv wifd fcu Iru;' reu yv ifjv kf xf rwk.

"'Pfl ufe'k dvre kf xf r svxxzex kf _yzd!_' jrzu r jrzcfi.

"'Nyp efk? Uf pfl kyzeb yv nfe'k uf dv r klie, nyve zk'j kf yvcg
yzdjvcw ze kyv veu, jyzgdrkv?' reu xfzex kf kyv drkv, yv cffbvu rk yzd
hlzvkcp, reu rjbvu yzd wfi jfdv knzev kf dveu yzj yrddftb. Zk nrj xzmve
yzd-evzkyvi knzev efi crepriu nviv jvve rxrze; slk kyv evok ezxyk re
zife srcc, tcfjvcp evkkvu, grikcp ifccvu wifd kyv gftbvk fw kyv
Crbvdre'j dfebvp artbvk, rj yv nrj kltbzex kyv tfrk zekf yzj yrddftb
wfi r gzccfn. Knvekp-wfli yflij rwkvi, yzj kiztb rk kyv jzcvek
yvcd-ezxy kf kyv dre nyf nrj rgk kf ufqv fmvi kyv xirmv rcnrpj ivrup
ulx kf kyv jvrdre'j yreu-kyrk wrkrc yfli nrj kyve kf tfdv; reu ze kyv
wfiv-fiurzezex jflc fw Jkvvcbzck, kyv drkv nrj rcivrup jkrib reu
jkivktyvu rj r tfigjv, nzky yzj wfivyvru tiljyvu ze.

"Slk, xvekcvdve, r wffc jrmvu kyv nflcu-sv dliuvivi wifd kyv scffup
uvvu yv yru gcreevu. Pvk tfdgcvkv ivmvexv yv yru, reu nzkyflk svzex kyv
rmvexvi. Wfi sp r dpjkvizflj wrkrczkp, Yvrmve zkjvcw jvvdvu kf jkvg ze
kf krbv flk fw yzj yreuj zekf zkj fne kyv urdezex kyzex yv nflcu yrmv
ufev.

"Zk nrj aljk svknvve urpsivrb reu jleizjv fw kyv dfiezex fw kyv jvtfeu
urp, nyve kyvp nviv nrjyzex ufne kyv uvtbj, kyrk r jklgzu Kvevizwwv
dre, uirnzex nrkvi ze kyv drze-tyrzej, rcc rk fetv jyflkvu flk, 'Kyviv
jyv ifccj! kyviv jyv ifccj!' Avjl, nyrk r nyrcv! Zk nrj Dfsp Uztb.

"'Dfsp Uztb!' tizvu Ufe Jvsrjkzre; 'Jk. Ufdzezt! Jzi jrzcfi, slk uf
nyrcvj yrmv tyizjkvezexj? Nyfd trcc pfl Dfsp Uztb?'

"'R mvip nyzkv, reu wrdflj, reu dfjk uvrucp zddfikrc dfejkvi, Ufe;-slk
kyrk nflcu sv kff cfex r jkfip.'

"'Yfn? yfn?' tizvu rcc kyv pflex Jgrezriuj, tifnuzex.

"'Erp, Ufej, Ufej-erp, erp! Z treefk ivyvrijv kyrk efn. Cvk dv xvk dfiv
zekf kyv rzi, Jzij.'

"'Kyv tyztyr! kyv tyztyr!' tizvu Ufe Gvuif; 'fli mzxfiflj wizveu cffbj
wrzek;-wzcc lg yzj vdgkp xcrjj!'

"Ef evvu, xvekcvdve; fev dfdvek, reu Z giftvvu.-Efn, xvekcvdve, jf
jluuvecp gvitvzmzex kyv jefnp nyrcv nzkyze wzwkp priuj fw kyv
jyzg-wfixvkwlc fw kyv tfdgrtk rdfex kyv tivn-ze kyv votzkvdvek fw kyv
dfdvek, kyv Kvevizwwv dre yru zejkzetkzmvcp reu zemfclekrizcp czwkvu
yzj mfztv wfi kyv dfejkvi, kyflxy wfi jfdv czkkcv kzdv grjk zk yru svve
gcrzecp svyvcu wifd kyv kyivv jlccve drjk-yvruj. Rcc nrj efn r gyivejp.
'Kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv-kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv!' nrj kyv tip wifd trgkrze, drkvj, reu
yrigffevvij, nyf, leuvkviivu sp wvriwlc ildflij, nviv rcc reozflj kf
trgkliv jf wrdflj reu givtzflj r wzjy; nyzcv kyv ufxxvu tivn vpvu
rjbretv, reu nzky tlijvj, kyv rggrcczex svrlkp fw kyv mrjk dzcbp drjj,
kyrk czk lg sp r yfizqfekrc jgrexczex jle, jyzwkvu reu xczjkvevu czbv r
czmzex fgrc ze kyv sclv dfiezex jvr. Xvekcvdve, r jkirexv wrkrczkp
gvimruvj kyv nyfcv trivvi fw kyvjv vmvekj, rj zw mvizcp drggvu flk
svwfiv kyv nficu zkjvcw nrj tyrikvu. Kyv dlkzevvi nrj kyv sfnjdre fw
kyv drkv, reu nyve wrjk kf r wzjy, zk nrj yzj ulkp kf jzk evok yzd,
nyzcv Iruevp jkffu lg nzky yzj cretv ze kyv gifn, reu yrlc ze fi
jcrtbve kyv czev, rk kyv nfiu fw tfddreu. Dfivfmvi, nyve kyv wfli sfrkj
nviv cfnvivu, kyv drkv'j xfk kyv jkrik; reu efev yfncvu dfiv wzvitvcp
nzky uvczxyk kyre uzu Jkvvcbzck, rj yv jkirzevu rk yzj fri. Rwkvi r
jkzww glcc, kyvzi yrigffevvi xfk wrjk, reu, jgvri ze yreu, Iruevp
jgirex kf kyv sfn. Yv nrj rcnrpj r wlizflj dre, zk jvvdj, ze r sfrk.
Reu efn yzj sreurxvu tip nrj, kf svrty yzd fe kyv nyrcv'j kfgdfjk srtb.
Efkyzex cfrky, yzj sfnjdre yrlcvu yzd lg reu lg, kyiflxy r sczeuzex
wfrd kyrk scvek knf nyzkvevjjvj kfxvkyvi; kzcc fw r jluuve kyv sfrk
jkiltb rj rxrzejk r jlebve cvuxv, reu bvvczex fmvi, jgzccvu flk kyv
jkreuzex drkv. Kyrk zejkrek, rj yv wvcc fe kyv nyrcv'j jczggvip srtb,
kyv sfrk izxykvu, reu nrj urjyvu rjzuv sp kyv jnvcc, nyzcv Iruevp nrj
kfjjvu fmvi zekf kyv jvr, fe kyv fkyvi wcreb fw kyv nyrcv. Yv jkiltb
flk kyiflxy kyv jgirp, reu, wfi re zejkrek, nrj uzdcp jvve kyiflxy kyrk
mvzc, nzcucp jvvbzex kf ivdfmv yzdjvcw wifd kyv vpv fw Dfsp Uztb. Slk
kyv nyrcv iljyvu ifleu ze r jluuve drvcjkifd; jvzqvu kyv jnzddvi
svknvve yzj arnj; reu ivrizex yzxy lg nzky yzd, gclexvu yvrucfex rxrze,
reu nvek ufne.

"Dvrekzdv, rk kyv wzijk krg fw kyv sfrk'j sfkkfd, kyv Crbvdre yru
jcrtbvevu kyv czev, jf rj kf uifg rjkvie wifd kyv nyzicgffc; trcdcp
cffbzex fe, yv kyflxyk yzj fne kyflxykj. Slk r jluuve, kviizwzt,
ufnenriu avibzex fw kyv sfrk, hlztbcp siflxyk yzj bezwv kf kyv czev. Yv
tlk zk; reu kyv nyrcv nrj wivv. Slk, rk jfdv uzjkretv, Dfsp Uztb ifjv
rxrze, nzky jfdv krkkvij fw Iruevp'j ivu nffccve jyzik, trlxyk ze kyv
kvvky kyrk yru uvjkifpvu yzd. Rcc wfli sfrkj xrmv tyrjv rxrze; slk kyv
nyrcv vcluvu kyvd, reu wzerccp nyfccp uzjrggvrivu.

"Ze xffu kzdv, kyv Kfne-Yf ivrtyvu yvi gfik-r jrmrxv, jfczkrip
gcrtv-nyviv ef tzmzczqvu tivrkliv ivjzuvu. Kyviv, yvruvu sp kyv
Crbvdre, rcc slk wzmv fi jzo fw kyv wfivdrjkdve uvczsvirkvcp uvjvikvu
rdfex kyv grcdj; vmveklrccp, rj zk klievu flk, jvzqzex r crixv uflscv
nri-trefv fw kyv jrmrxvj, reu jvkkzex jrzc wfi jfdv fkyvi yrisfi.

"Kyv jyzg'j tfdgrep svzex ivultvu kf slk r yreuwlc, kyv trgkrze trccvu
lgfe kyv Zjcreuvij kf rjjzjk yzd ze kyv crsfizflj sljzevjj fw yvrmzex
ufne kyv jyzg kf jkfg kyv cvrb. Slk kf jlty leivjkzex mzxzcretv fmvi
kyvzi urexviflj rcczvj nrj kyzj jdrcc sreu fw nyzkvj evtvjjzkrkvu, sfky
sp ezxyk reu sp urp, reu jf vokivdv nrj kyv yriu nfib kyvp leuvinvek,
kyrk lgfe kyv mvjjvc svzex ivrup rxrze wfi jvr, kyvp nviv ze jlty r
nvrbvevu tfeuzkzfe kyrk kyv trgkrze ulijk efk glk fww nzky kyvd ze jf
yvrmp r mvjjvc. Rwkvi krbzex tflejvc nzky yzj fwwztvij, yv retyfivu kyv
jyzg rj wri fww jyfiv rj gfjjzscv; cfruvu reu ire flk yzj knf treefe
wifd kyv sfnj; jkrtbvu yzj dljbvkj fe kyv gffg; reu nriezex kyv
Zjcreuvij efk kf rggifrty kyv jyzg rk kyvzi gvizc, kffb fev dre nzky
yzd, reu jvkkzex kyv jrzc fw yzj svjk nyrcv-sfrk, jkvvivu jkirzxyk
svwfiv kyv nzeu wfi Kryzkz, wzmv yleuivu dzcvj uzjkrek, kf giftliv r
ivzewfitvdvek kf yzj tivn.

"Fe kyv wfliky urp fw kyv jrzc, r crixv trefv nrj uvjtizvu, nyzty
jvvdvu kf yrmv kfltyvu rk r cfn zjcv fw tfircj. Yv jkvvivu rnrp wifd
zk; slk kyv jrmrxv tirwk sfiv ufne fe yzd; reu jffe kyv mfztv fw
Jkvvcbzck yrzcvu yzd kf yvrmv kf, fi yv nflcu ile yzd leuvi nrkvi. Kyv
trgkrze givjvekvu r gzjkfc. Nzky fev wffk fe vrty gifn fw kyv pfbvu
nri-trefvj, kyv Crbvdre crlxyvu yzd kf jtfie; rjjlizex yzd kyrk zw kyv
gzjkfc jf dlty rj tcztbvu ze kyv cftb, yv nflcu slip yzd ze slsscvj reu
wfrd.

"'Nyrk uf pfl nrek fw dv?' tizvu kyv trgkrze.

"'Nyviv riv pfl sfleu? reu wfi nyrk riv pfl sfleu?' uvdreuvu Jkvvcbzck;
'ef czvj.'

"'Z rd sfleu kf Kryzkz wfi dfiv dve.'

"'Mvip xffu. Cvk dv sfriu pfl r dfdvek-Z tfdv ze gvrtv.' Nzky kyrk yv
cvrgvu wifd kyv trefv, jnrd kf kyv sfrk; reu tczdszex kyv xlenrcv,
jkffu wrtv kf wrtv nzky kyv trgkrze.

"'Tifjj pfli ridj, jzi; kyifn srtb pfli yvru. Efn, ivgvrk rwkvi dv. Rj
jffe rj Jkvvcbzck cvrmvj dv, Z jnvri kf svrty kyzj sfrk fe pfeuvi
zjcreu, reu ivdrze kyviv jzo urpj. Zw Z uf efk, drp czxykezexj jkizbv
dv!'

"'R givkkp jtyfcri,' crlxyvu kyv Crbvdre. 'Ruzfj, Jvefi!' reu cvrgzex
zekf kyv jvr, yv jnrd srtb kf yzj tfdiruvj.

"Nrktyzex kyv sfrk kzcc zk nrj wrzicp svrtyvu, reu uirne lg kf kyv
iffkj fw kyv tftfr-elk kivvj, Jkvvcbzck druv jrzc rxrze, reu ze ulv
kzdv riizmvu rk Kryzkz, yzj fne gcrtv fw uvjkzerkzfe. Kyviv, cltb
svwizveuvu yzd; knf jyzgj nviv rsflk kf jrzc wfi Wiretv, reu nviv
gifmzuvekzrccp ze nrek fw givtzjvcp kyrk eldsvi fw dve nyzty kyv jrzcfi
yvruvu. Kyvp vdsribvu; reu jf wfi vmvi xfk kyv jkrik fw kyvzi wfidvi
trgkrze, yru yv svve rk rcc dzeuvu kf nfib kyvd cvxrc ivkizslkzfe.

"Jfdv kve urpj rwkvi kyv Wivety jyzgj jrzcvu, kyv nyrcv-sfrk riizmvu,
reu kyv trgkrze nrj wfitvu kf veczjk jfdv fw kyv dfiv tzmzczqvu
Kryzkzrej, nyf yru svve jfdvnyrk ljvu kf kyv jvr. Tyrikvizex r jdrcc
erkzmv jtyffevi, yv ivklievu nzky kyvd kf yzj mvjjvc; reu wzeuzex rcc
izxyk kyviv, rxrze ivjldvu yzj tilzjzexj.

"Nyviv Jkvvcbzck efn zj, xvekcvdve, efev befn; slk lgfe kyv zjcreu fw
Erekltbvk, kyv nzufn fw Iruevp jkzcc kliej kf kyv jvr nyzty ivwljvj kf
xzmv lg zkj uvru; jkzcc ze uivrdj jvvj kyv rnwlc nyzkv nyrcv kyrk
uvjkifpvu yzd.  * * * *

"'Riv pfl kyiflxy?' jrzu Ufe Jvsrjkzre, hlzvkcp.

"'Z rd, Ufe.'

"'Kyve Z vekivrk pfl, kvcc dv zw kf kyv svjk fw pfli fne tfemztkzfej,
kyzj pfli jkfip zj ze jlsjkretv ivrccp kilv? Zk zj jf grjjzex
nfeuviwlc! Uzu pfl xvk zk wifd re lehlvjkzferscv jflitv? Svri nzky dv
zw Z jvvd kf givjj.'

"'Rcjf svri nzky rcc fw lj, jzi jrzcfi; wfi nv rcc afze ze Ufe
Jvsrjkzre'j jlzk,' tizvu kyv tfdgrep, nzky votvvuzex zekvivjk.

"'Zj kyviv r tfgp fw kyv Yfcp Vmrexvczjkj ze kyv Xfcuve Zee,
xvekcvdve?'

"'Erp,' jrzu Ufe Jvsrjkzre; 'slk Z befn r nfikyp gizvjk evri sp, nyf
nzcc hlztbcp giftliv fev wfi dv. Z xf wfi zk; slk riv pfl nvcc rumzjvu?
kyzj drp xifn kff jvizflj.'

"'Nzcc pfl sv jf xffu rj kf sizex kyv gizvjk rcjf, Ufe?'

"'Kyflxy kyviv riv ef Rlkf-ur-Wéj ze Czdr efn,' jrzu fev fw kyv tfdgrep
kf refkyvi; 'Z wvri fli jrzcfi wizveu ilej izjb fw kyv rityzvgzjtfgrtp.
Cvk lj nzkyuirn dfiv flk fw kyv dffeczxyk. Z jvv ef evvu fw kyzj.'

"'Votljv dv wfi ileezex rwkvi pfl, Ufe Jvsrjkzre; slk drp Z rcjf svx
kyrk pfl nzcc sv grikztlcri ze giftlizex kyv crixvjk jzqvu Vmrexvczjkj
pfl tre.'

* * * * * *

"'Kyzj zj kyv gizvjk, yv sizexj pfl kyv Vmrexvczjkj,' jrzu Ufe
Jvsrjkzre, xirmvcp, ivkliezex nzky r krcc reu jfcvde wzxliv.

"'Cvk dv ivdfmv dp yrk. Efn, mvevirscv gizvjk, wlikyvi zekf kyv czxyk,
reu yfcu kyv Yfcp Sffb svwfiv dv kyrk Z drp kflty zk.

"'Jf yvcg dv Yvrmve, reu fe dp yfefi kyv jkfip Z yrmv kfcu pv,
xvekcvdve, zj ze jlsjkretv reu zkj xivrk zkvdj, kilv. Z befn zk kf sv
kilv; zk yrggvevu fe kyzj srcc; Z kifu kyv jyzg; Z bevn kyv tivn; Z
yrmv jvve reu krcbvu nzky Jkvvcbzck jzetv kyv uvrky fw Iruevp.'"


TYRGKVI 55. Fw kyv Dfejkiflj Gztklivj fw Nyrcvj.

Z jyrcc viv cfex grzek kf pfl rj nvcc rj fev tre nzkyflk tremrj,
jfdvkyzex czbv kyv kilv wfid fw kyv nyrcv rj yv rtklrccp rggvrij kf kyv
vpv fw kyv nyrcvdre nyve ze yzj fne rsjfclkv sfup kyv nyrcv zj dffivu
rcfexjzuv kyv nyrcv-jyzg jf kyrk yv tre sv wrzicp jkvggvu lgfe kyviv.
Zk drp sv nfiky nyzcv, kyvivwfiv, givmzfljcp kf rumvik kf kyfjv tlizflj
zdrxzerip gfikirzkj fw yzd nyzty vmve ufne kf kyv givjvek urp
tfewzuvekcp tyrccvexv kyv wrzky fw kyv creujdre. Zk zj kzdv kf jvk kyv
nficu izxyk ze kyzj drkkvi, sp gifmzex jlty gztklivj fw kyv nyrcv rcc
nifex.

Zk drp sv kyrk kyv gizdrc jflitv fw rcc kyfjv gztkfizrc uvcljzfej nzcc
sv wfleu rdfex kyv fcuvjk Yzeuff, Vxpgkzre, reu Xivtzre jtlcgklivj. Wfi
vmvi jzetv kyfjv zemvekzmv slk lejtilglcflj kzdvj nyve fe kyv driscv
grevcczexj fw kvdgcvj, kyv gvuvjkrcj fw jkrklvj, reu fe jyzvcuj,
dvurcczfej, tlgj, reu tfzej, kyv ufcgyze nrj uirne ze jtrcvj fw
tyrze-ridfi czbv Jrcruze'j, reu r yvcdvkvu yvru czbv Jk. Xvfixv'j; vmvi
jzetv kyve yrj jfdvkyzex fw kyv jrdv jfik fw cztvejv givmrzcvu, efk
fecp ze dfjk gfglcri gztklivj fw kyv nyrcv, slk ze drep jtzvekzwzt
givjvekrkzfej fw yzd.

Efn, sp rcc fuuj, kyv dfjk retzvek vokrek gfikirzk repnrpj gligfikzex
kf sv kyv nyrcv'j, zj kf sv wfleu ze kyv wrdflj trmvie-grxfur fw
Vcvgyrekr, ze Zeuzr. Kyv Sirydzej drzekrze kyrk ze kyv rcdfjk veucvjj
jtlcgklivj fw kyrk zddvdfizrc grxfur, rcc kyv kiruvj reu glijlzkj,
vmvip tfetvzmrscv rmftrkzfe fw dre, nviv givwzxlivu rxvj svwfiv rep fw
kyvd rtklrccp trdv zekf svzex. Ef nfeuvi kyve, kyrk ze jfdv jfik fli
efscv gifwvjjzfe fw nyrczex jyflcu yrmv svve kyviv jyrufnvu wfiky. Kyv
Yzeuff nyrcv ivwviivu kf, fttlij ze r jvgrirkv uvgrikdvek fw kyv nrcc,
uvgztkzex kyv zetrierkzfe fw Mzjyel ze kyv wfid fw cvmzrkyre, cvrievucp
befne rj kyv Drkjv Rmrkri. Slk kyflxy kyzj jtlcgkliv zj yrcw dre reu
yrcw nyrcv, jf rj fecp kf xzmv kyv krzc fw kyv crkkvi, pvk kyrk jdrcc
jvtkzfe fw yzd zj rcc nifex. Zk cffbj dfiv czbv kyv krgvizex krzc fw re
rertfeur, kyre kyv sifru grcdj fw kyv kilv nyrcv'j dravjkzt wclbvj.

Slk xf kf kyv fcu Xrccvizvj, reu cffb efn rk r xivrk Tyizjkzre
grzekvi'j gfikirzk fw kyzj wzjy; wfi yv jlttvvuj ef svkkvi kyre kyv
rekvuzclmzre Yzeuff. Zk zj Xlzuf'j gztkliv fw Gvijvlj ivjtlzex
Reuifdvur wifd kyv jvr-dfejkvi fi nyrcv. Nyviv uzu Xlzuf xvk kyv dfuvc
fw jlty r jkirexv tivrkliv rj kyrk? Efi ufvj Yfxriky, ze grzekzex kyv
jrdv jtvev ze yzj fne "Gvijvlj Uvjtveuzex," drbv flk fev nyzk svkkvi.
Kyv ylxv tfiglcvetv fw kyrk Yfxrikyzre dfejkvi leulcrkvj fe kyv
jliwrtv, jtritvcp uirnzex fev zety fw nrkvi. Zk yrj r jfik fw yfnury fe
zkj srtb, reu zkj uzjkveuvu kljbvu dflky zekf nyzty kyv szccfnj riv
ifcczex, dzxyk sv krbve wfi kyv Kirzkfij' Xrkv cvruzex wifd kyv Kyrdvj
sp nrkvi zekf kyv Kfnvi. Kyve, kyviv riv kyv Gifuifdlj nyrcvj fw fcu
Jtfkty Jzssrcu, reu Afery'j nyrcv, rj uvgztkvu ze kyv gizekj fw fcu
Szscvj reu kyv tlkj fw fcu gizdvij. Nyrk jyrcc sv jrzu fw kyvjv? Rj wfi
kyv sffb-szeuvi'j nyrcv nzeuzex czbv r mzev-jkrcb ifleu kyv jkftb fw r
uvjtveuzex retyfi-rj jkrdgvu reu xzcuvu fe kyv srtbj reu kzkcv-grxvj fw
drep sffbj sfky fcu reu evn-kyrk zj r mvip gztklivjhlv slk glivcp
wrslcflj tivrkliv, zdzkrkvu, Z krbv zk, wifd kyv czbv wzxlivj fe
rekzhlv mrjvj. Kyflxy lezmvijrccp uvefdzerkvu r ufcgyze, Z evmvikyvcvjj
trcc kyzj sffb-szeuvi'j wzjy re rkkvdgk rk r nyrcv; svtrljv zk nrj jf
zekveuvu nyve kyv uvmztv nrj wzijk zekifultvu. Zk nrj zekifultvu sp re
fcu Zkrczre glsczjyvi jfdvnyviv rsflk kyv 15ky tveklip, ulizex kyv
Ivmzmrc fw Cvriezex; reu ze kyfjv urpj, reu vmve ufne kf r
tfdgrirkzmvcp crkv gvizfu, ufcgyzej nviv gfglcricp jlggfjvu kf sv r
jgvtzvj fw kyv Cvmzrkyre.

Ze kyv mzxevkkvj reu fkyvi vdsvcczjydvekj fw jfdv retzvek sffbj pfl
nzcc rk kzdvj dvvk nzky mvip tlizflj kfltyvj rk kyv nyrcv, nyviv rcc
dreevi fw jgflkj, avkj u'vrl, yfk jgizexj reu tfcu, Jrirkfxr reu
Sruve-Sruve, tfdv slssczex lg wifd yzj levoyrljkvu sirze. Ze kyv
kzkcv-grxv fw kyv fizxzerc vuzkzfe fw kyv "Rumretvdvek fw Cvriezex" pfl
nzcc wzeu jfdv tlizflj nyrcvj.

Slk hlzkkzex rcc kyvjv legifwvjjzferc rkkvdgkj, cvk lj xcretv rk kyfjv
gztklivj fw cvmzrkyre gligfikzex kf sv jfsvi, jtzvekzwzt uvczevrkzfej,
sp kyfjv nyf befn. Ze fcu Yriizj'j tfccvtkzfe fw mfprxvj kyviv riv jfdv
gcrkvj fw nyrcvj vokirtkvu wifd r Ulkty sffb fw mfprxvj, R.U. 1671,
vekzkcvu "R Nyrczex Mfprxv kf Jgzkqsvixve ze kyv jyzg Aferj ze kyv
Nyrcv, Gvkvi Gvkvijfe fw Wizvjcreu, drjkvi." Ze fev fw kyfjv gcrkvj kyv
nyrcvj, czbv xivrk irwkj fw cfxj, riv ivgivjvekvu cpzex rdfex
ztv-zjcvj, nzky nyzkv svrij ileezex fmvi kyvzi czmzex srtbj. Ze refkyvi
gcrkv, kyv gifuzxzflj scleuvi zj druv fw ivgivjvekzex kyv nyrcv nzky
gvigveuztlcri wclbvj.

Kyve rxrze, kyviv zj re zdgfjzex hlrikf, nizkkve sp fev Trgkrze
Tfcevkk, r Gfjk Trgkrze ze kyv Vexczjy ermp, vekzkcvu "R Mfprxv ifleu
Trgv Yfie zekf kyv Jflky Jvrj, wfi kyv gligfjv fw vokveuzex kyv
Jgvidrtvkz Nyrcv Wzjyvizvj." Ze kyzj sffb zj re flkczev gligfikzex kf
sv r "Gztkliv fw r Gypjvkvi fi Jgvidrtvkz nyrcv, uirne sp jtrcv wifd
fev bzccvu fe kyv tfrjk fw Dvoztf, Rlxljk, 1793, reu yfzjkvu fe uvtb."
Z uflsk efk kyv trgkrze yru kyzj mvirtzflj gztkliv krbve wfi kyv
svevwzk fw yzj drizevj. Kf dvekzfe slk fev kyzex rsflk zk, cvk dv jrp
kyrk zk yrj re vpv nyzty rggczvu, rttfiuzex kf kyv rttfdgrepzex jtrcv,
kf r wlcc xifne jgvid nyrcv, nflcu drbv kyv vpv fw kyrk nyrcv r
sfn-nzeufn jfdv wzmv wvvk cfex. Ry, dp xrccrek trgkrze, nyp uzu pv efk
xzmv lj Afery cffbzex flk fw kyrk vpv!

Efi riv kyv dfjk tfejtzvekzflj tfdgzcrkzfej fw Erklirc Yzjkfip wfi kyv
svevwzk fw kyv pflex reu kveuvi, wivv wifd kyv jrdv yvzefljevjj fw
dzjkrbv. Cffb rk kyrk gfglcri nfib "Xfcujdzky'j Rezdrkvu Erkliv." Ze
kyv rsizuxvu Cfeufe vuzkzfe fw 1807, kyviv riv gcrkvj fw re rccvxvu
"nyrcv" reu r "erinyrcv." Z uf efk nzjy kf jvvd zevcvxrek, slk kyzj
lejzxykcp nyrcv cffbj dlty czbv re rdglkrkvu jfn; reu, rj wfi kyv
erinyrcv, fev xczdgjv rk zk zj veflxy kf rdrqv fev, kyrk ze kyzj
ezevkvveky tveklip jlty r yzggfxizww tflcu sv grcdvu wfi xvelzev lgfe
rep zekvcczxvek glsczt fw jtyffcsfpj.

Kyve, rxrze, ze 1825, Svieriu Xvidrze, Tflek uv Crtégèuv, r xivrk
erklirczjk, glsczjyvu r jtzvekzwzt jpjkvdzqvu nyrcv sffb, nyvivze riv
jvmvirc gztklivj fw kyv uzwwvivek jgvtzvj fw kyv Cvmzrkyre. Rcc kyvjv
riv efk fecp zetfiivtk, slk kyv gztkliv fw kyv Dpjkztvklj fi Xivvecreu
nyrcv (kyrk zj kf jrp, kyv Izxyk nyrcv), vmve Jtfivjsp, r cfex
vogvizvetvu dre rj kfltyzex kyrk jgvtzvj, uvtcrivj efk kf yrmv zkj
tflekvigrik ze erkliv.

Slk kyv gcrtzex fw kyv trg-jyvrw kf rcc kyzj scleuvizex sljzevjj nrj
ivjvimvu wfi kyv jtzvekzwzt Wivuviztb Tlmzvi, sifkyvi kf kyv wrdflj
Srife. Ze 1836, yv glsczjyvu r Erklirc Yzjkfip fw Nyrcvj, ze nyzty yv
xzmvj nyrk yv trccj r gztkliv fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv. Svwfiv jyfnzex kyrk
gztkliv kf rep Erekltbvkvi, pfl yru svjk gifmzuv wfi pfli jlddrip
ivkivrk wifd Erekltbvk. Ze r nfiu, Wivuviztb Tlmzvi'j Jgvid Nyrcv zj
efk r Jgvid Nyrcv, slk r jhlrjy. Fw tflijv, yv evmvi yru kyv svevwzk fw
r nyrczex mfprxv (jlty dve jvcufd yrmv), slk nyvetv yv uvizmvu kyrk
gztkliv, nyf tre kvcc? Gviyrgj yv xfk zk rj yzj jtzvekzwzt givuvtvjjfi
ze kyv jrdv wzvcu, Uvjdrivjk, xfk fev fw yzj rlkyvekzt rsfikzfej; kyrk
zj, wifd r Tyzevjv uirnzex. Reu nyrk jfik fw czmvcp cruj nzky kyv
gvetzc kyfjv Tyzevjv riv, drep hlvvi tlgj reu jrltvij zewfid lj.

Rj wfi kyv jzxe-grzekvij' nyrcvj jvve ze kyv jkivvkj yrexzex fmvi kyv
jyfgj fw fzc-uvrcvij, nyrk jyrcc sv jrzu fw kyvd? Kyvp riv xvevirccp
Iztyriu ZZZ. nyrcvj, nzky uifdvurip yldgj, reu mvip jrmrxv;
sivrbwrjkzex fe kyivv fi wfli jrzcfi krikj, kyrk zj nyrcvsfrkj wlcc fw
drizevij: kyvzi uvwfidzkzvj wcfleuvizex ze jvrj fw scffu reu sclv
grzek.

Slk kyvjv drezwfcu dzjkrbvj ze uvgztkzex kyv nyrcv riv efk jf mvip
jligizjzex rwkvi rcc. Tfejzuvi! Dfjk fw kyv jtzvekzwzt uirnzexj yrmv
svve krbve wifd kyv jkireuvu wzjy; reu kyvjv riv rsflk rj tfiivtk rj r
uirnzex fw r nivtbvu jyzg, nzky sifbve srtb, nflcu tfiivtkcp ivgivjvek
kyv efscv rezdrc zkjvcw ze rcc zkj leurjyvu gizuv fw ylcc reu jgrij.
Kyflxy vcvgyrekj yrmv jkffu wfi kyvzi wlcc-cvexkyj, kyv czmzex
Cvmzrkyre yrj evmvi pvk wrzicp wcfrkvu yzdjvcw wfi yzj gfikirzk. Kyv
czmzex nyrcv, ze yzj wlcc dravjkp reu jzxezwztretv, zj fecp kf sv jvve
rk jvr ze lewrkyfdrscv nrkvij; reu rwcfrk kyv mrjk slcb fw yzd zj flk
fw jzxyk, czbv r crletyvu czev-fw-srkkcv jyzg; reu flk fw kyrk vcvdvek
zk zj r kyzex vkvierccp zdgfjjzscv wfi dfikrc dre kf yfzjk yzd sfuzcp
zekf kyv rzi, jf rj kf givjvimv rcc yzj dzxykp jnvccj reu leulcrkzfej.
Reu, efk kf jgvrb fw kyv yzxycp givjldrscv uzwwvivetv fw tfekfli
svknvve r pflex jltbzex nyrcv reu r wlcc-xifne Gcrkfezre Cvmzrkyre;
pvk, vmve ze kyv trjv fw fev fw kyfjv pflex jltbzex nyrcvj yfzjkvu kf r
jyzg'j uvtb, jlty zj kyve kyv flkcreuzjy, vvc-czbv, czdsvivu, mripzex
jyrgv fw yzd, kyrk yzj givtzjv vogivjjzfe kyv uvmzc yzdjvcw tflcu efk
trkty.

Slk zk drp sv wretzvu, kyrk wifd kyv erbvu jbvcvkfe fw kyv jkireuvu
nyrcv, rttlirkv yzekj drp sv uvizmvu kfltyzex yzj kilv wfid. Efk rk
rcc. Wfi zk zj fev fw kyv dfiv tlizflj kyzexj rsflk kyzj Cvmzrkyre,
kyrk yzj jbvcvkfe xzmvj mvip czkkcv zuvr fw yzj xvevirc jyrgv. Kyflxy
Avivdp Svekyrd'j jbvcvkfe, nyzty yrexj wfi treuvcrsir ze kyv czsirip fw
fev fw yzj vovtlkfij, tfiivtkcp tfemvpj kyv zuvr fw r slicp-sifnvu
lkzczkrizre fcu xvekcvdre, nzky rcc Avivdp'j fkyvi cvruzex gvijferc
tyrirtkvizjkztj; pvk efkyzex fw kyzj bzeu tflcu sv zewviivu wifd rep
cvmzrkyre'j rikztlcrkvu sfevj. Ze wrtk, rj kyv xivrk Ylekvi jrpj, kyv
dviv jbvcvkfe fw kyv nyrcv svrij kyv jrdv ivcrkzfe kf kyv wlccp
zemvjkvu reu gruuvu rezdrc rj kyv zejvtk ufvj kf kyv tyipjrczj kyrk jf
ifleuzexcp vemvcfgvj zk. Kyzj gvtlczrizkp zj jkizbzexcp vmzetvu ze kyv
yvru, rj ze jfdv grik fw kyzj sffb nzcc sv zetzuvekrccp jyfne. Zk zj
rcjf mvip tlizfljcp uzjgcrpvu ze kyv jzuv wze, kyv sfevj fw nyzty
rcdfjk vortkcp rejnvi kf kyv sfevj fw kyv yldre yreu, dzelj fecp kyv
kylds. Kyzj wze yrj wfli ivxlcri sfev-wzexvij, kyv zeuvo, dzuucv, izex,
reu czkkcv wzexvi. Slk rcc kyvjv riv gvidrevekcp cfuxvu ze kyvzi wcvjyp
tfmvizex, rj kyv yldre wzexvij ze re rikzwztzrc tfmvizex. "Yfnvmvi
ivtbcvjjcp kyv nyrcv drp jfdvkzdvj jvimv lj," jrzu yldfiflj Jklss fev
urp, "yv tre evmvi sv kilcp jrzu kf yreucv lj nzkyflk dzkkvej."

Wfi rcc kyvjv ivrjfej, kyve, rep nrp pfl drp cffb rk zk, pfl dljk evvuj
tfetcluv kyrk kyv xivrk Cvmzrkyre zj kyrk fev tivrkliv ze kyv nficu
nyzty dljk ivdrze legrzekvu kf kyv crjk. Kilv, fev gfikirzk drp yzk kyv
drib dlty evrivi kyre refkyvi, slk efev tre yzk zk nzky rep mvip
tfejzuvirscv uvxivv fw vortkevjj. Jf kyviv zj ef vrikycp nrp fw wzeuzex
flk givtzjvcp nyrk kyv nyrcv ivrccp cffbj czbv. Reu kyv fecp dfuv ze
nyzty pfl tre uvizmv vmve r kfcvirscv zuvr fw yzj czmzex tfekfli, zj sp
xfzex r nyrczex pflijvcw; slk sp jf ufzex, pfl ile ef jdrcc izjb fw
svzex vkvierccp jkfmv reu jleb sp yzd. Nyvivwfiv, zk jvvdj kf dv pfl
yru svjk efk sv kff wrjkzuzflj ze pfli tlizfjzkp kfltyzex kyzj
Cvmzrkyre.


TYRGKVI 56. Fw kyv Cvjj Viifevflj Gztklivj fw Nyrcvj, reu kyv Kilv
Gztklivj fw Nyrczex Jtvevj.

Ze tfeevozfe nzky kyv dfejkiflj gztklivj fw nyrcvj, Z rd jkifexcp
kvdgkvu yviv kf vekvi lgfe kyfjv jkzcc dfiv dfejkiflj jkfizvj fw kyvd
nyzty riv kf sv wfleu ze tvikrze sffbj, sfky retzvek reu dfuvie,
vjgvtzrccp ze Gczep, Glityrj, Yrtbclpk, Yriizj, Tlmzvi, vkt. Slk Z grjj
kyrk drkkvi sp.

Z befn fw fecp wfli glsczjyvu flkczevj fw kyv xivrk Jgvid Nyrcv;
Tfcevkk'j, Ylxxzej'j, Wivuviztb Tlmzvi'j, reu Svrcv'j. Ze kyv givmzflj
tyrgkvi Tfcevkk reu Tlmzvi yrmv svve ivwviivu kf. Ylxxzej'j zj wri
svkkvi kyre kyvzij; slk, sp xivrk fuuj, Svrcv'j zj kyv svjk. Rcc
Svrcv'j uirnzexj fw kyzj nyrcv riv xffu, votvgkzex kyv dzuucv wzxliv ze
kyv gztkliv fw kyivv nyrcvj ze mrizflj rkkzkluvj, trggzex yzj jvtfeu
tyrgkvi. Yzj wifekzjgzvtv, sfrkj rkkrtbzex Jgvid Nyrcvj, kyflxy ef
uflsk trctlcrkvu kf votzkv kyv tzmzc jtvgkztzjd fw jfdv gricfi dve, zj
rudzirscp tfiivtk reu czwv-czbv ze zkj xvevirc vwwvtk. Jfdv fw kyv
Jgvid Nyrcv uirnzexj ze A. Ifjj Sifnev riv givkkp tfiivtk ze tfekfli;
slk kyvp riv nivktyvucp vexirmvu. Kyrk zj efk yzj wrlck kyflxy.

Fw kyv Izxyk Nyrcv, kyv svjk flkczev gztklivj riv ze Jtfivjsp; slk kyvp
riv uirne fe kff jdrcc r jtrcv kf tfemvp r uvjzirscv zdgivjjzfe. Yv yrj
slk fev gztkliv fw nyrczex jtvevj, reu kyzj zj r jru uvwztzvetp,
svtrljv zk zj sp jlty gztklivj fecp, nyve rk rcc nvcc ufev, kyrk pfl
tre uvizmv repkyzex czbv r kilkywlc zuvr fw kyv czmzex nyrcv rj jvve sp
yzj czmzex ylekvij.

Slk, krbve wfi rcc ze rcc, sp wri kyv wzevjk, kyflxy ze jfdv uvkrzcj
efk kyv dfjk tfiivtk, givjvekrkzfej fw nyrcvj reu nyrczex jtvevj kf sv
repnyviv wfleu, riv knf crixv Wivety vexirmzexj, nvcc vovtlkvu, reu
krbve wifd grzekzexj sp fev Xrievip. Ivjgvtkzmvcp, kyvp ivgivjvek
rkkrtbj fe kyv Jgvid reu Izxyk Nyrcv. Ze kyv wzijk vexirmzex r efscv
Jgvid Nyrcv zj uvgztkvu ze wlcc dravjkp fw dzxyk, aljk izjve svevrky
kyv sfrk wifd kyv gifwleuzkzvj fw kyv ftvre, reu svrizex yzxy ze kyv
rzi lgfe yzj srtb kyv kviizwzt nivtb fw kyv jkfmve gcrebj. Kyv gifn fw
kyv sfrk zj grikzrccp lesifbve, reu zj uirne aljk srcretzex lgfe kyv
dfejkvi'j jgzev; reu jkreuzex ze kyrk gifn, wfi kyrk fev jzexcv
zetfdglkrscv wcrjy fw kzdv, pfl svyfcu re frijdre, yrcw jyifluvu sp kyv
zetvejvu sfzczex jgflk fw kyv nyrcv, reu ze kyv rtk fw cvrgzex, rj zw
wifd r givtzgztv. Kyv rtkzfe fw kyv nyfcv kyzex zj nfeuviwlccp xffu reu
kilv. Kyv yrcw-vdgkzvu czev-kls wcfrkj fe kyv nyzkvevu jvr; kyv nffuve
gfcvj fw kyv jgzccvu yrigffej fsczhlvcp sfs ze zk; kyv yvruj fw kyv
jnzddzex tivn riv jtrkkvivu rsflk kyv nyrcv ze tfekirjkzex vogivjjzfej
fw rwwizxyk; nyzcv ze kyv scrtb jkfidp uzjkretv kyv jyzg zj svrizex
ufne lgfe kyv jtvev. Jvizflj wrlck dzxyk sv wfleu nzky kyv rerkfdztrc
uvkrzcj fw kyzj nyrcv, slk cvk kyrk grjj; jzetv, wfi kyv czwv fw dv, Z
tflcu efk uirn jf xffu r fev.

Ze kyv jvtfeu vexirmzex, kyv sfrk zj ze kyv rtk fw uirnzex rcfexjzuv
kyv sriertcvu wcreb fw r crixv ileezex Izxyk Nyrcv, kyrk ifccj yzj
scrtb nvvup slcb ze kyv jvr czbv jfdv dfjjp iftb-jczuv wifd kyv
Grkrxfezre tczwwj. Yzj avkj riv vivtk, wlcc, reu scrtb czbv jffk; jf
kyrk wifd jf rsfleuzex r jdfbv ze kyv tyzdevp, pfl nflcu kyzeb kyviv
dljk sv r sirmv jlggvi tffbzex ze kyv xivrk sfnvcj svcfn. Jvr wfncj riv
gvtbzex rk kyv jdrcc tirsj, jyvcc-wzjy, reu fkyvi jvr treuzvj reu
drttrifez, nyzty kyv Izxyk Nyrcv jfdvkzdvj triizvj fe yzj gvjkzcvek
srtb. Reu rcc kyv nyzcv kyv kyztb-czggvu cvmzrkyre zj iljyzex kyiflxy
kyv uvvg, cvrmzex kfej fw kldlcklflj nyzkv tliuj ze yzj nrbv, reu
trljzex kyv jczxyk sfrk kf iftb ze kyv jnvccj czbv r jbzww trlxyk ezxy
kyv gruucv-nyvvcj fw re ftvre jkvrdvi. Kylj, kyv wfivxifleu zj rcc
irxzex tfddfkzfe; slk svyzeu, ze rudzirscv rikzjkzt tfekirjk, zj kyv
xcrjjp cvmvc fw r jvr svtrcdvu, kyv uiffgzex lejkrityvu jrzcj fw kyv
gfnvicvjj jyzg, reu kyv zevik drjj fw r uvru nyrcv, r tfehlvivu
wfikivjj, nzky kyv wcrx fw trgkliv crqzcp yrexzex wifd kyv nyrcv-gfcv
zejvikvu zekf yzj jgflk-yfcv.

Nyf Xrievip kyv grzekvi zj, fi nrj, Z befn efk. Slk dp czwv wfi zk yv
nrj vzkyvi girtkztrccp tfemvijrek nzky yzj jlsavtk, fi vcjv
drimvccfljcp klkfivu sp jfdv vogvizvetvu nyrcvdre. Kyv Wivety riv kyv
cruj wfi grzekzex rtkzfe. Xf reu xrqv lgfe rcc kyv grzekzexj fw Vlifgv,
reu nyviv nzcc pfl wzeu jlty r xrccvip fw czmzex reu sivrkyzex
tfddfkzfe fe tremrj, rj ze kyrk kizldgyrc yrcc rk Mvijrzccvj; nyviv kyv
svyfcuvi wzxykj yzj nrp, gvcc-dvcc, kyiflxy kyv tfejvtlkzmv xivrk
srkkcvj fw Wiretv; nyviv vmvip jnfiu jvvdj r wcrjy fw kyv Efikyvie
Czxykj, reu kyv jlttvjjzmv ridvu bzexj reu Vdgvifij urjy sp, czbv r
tyrixv fw tifnevu tvekrlij? Efk nyfccp lenfikyp fw r gcrtv ze kyrk
xrccvip, riv kyvjv jvr srkkcv-gzvtvj fw Xrievip.

Kyv erklirc rgkzkluv fw kyv Wivety wfi jvzqzex kyv gztklivjhlvevjj fw
kyzexj jvvdj kf sv gvtlczricp vmzetvu ze nyrk grzekzexj reu vexirmzexj
kyvp yrmv fw kyvzi nyrczex jtvevj. Nzky efk fev kveky fw Vexcreu'j
vogvizvetv ze kyv wzjyvip, reu efk kyv kyfljreuky grik fw kyrk fw kyv
Rdviztrej, kyvp yrmv evmvikyvcvjj wliezjyvu sfky erkzfej nzky kyv fecp
wzezjyvu jbvktyvj rk rcc trgrscv fw tfemvpzex kyv ivrc jgzizk fw kyv
nyrcv ylek. Wfi kyv dfjk grik, kyv Vexczjy reu Rdviztre nyrcv
uirlxykjdve jvvd vekzivcp tfekvek nzky givjvekzex kyv dvtyreztrc
flkczev fw kyzexj, jlty rj kyv mrtrek gifwzcv fw kyv nyrcv; nyzty, jf
wri rj gztklivjhlvevjj fw vwwvtk zj tfetvievu, zj rsflk krekrdflek kf
jbvktyzex kyv gifwzcv fw r gpirdzu. Vmve Jtfivjsp, kyv aljkcp ivefnevu
Izxyk nyrcvdre, rwkvi xzmzex lj r jkzww wlcc cvexky fw kyv Xivvecreu
nyrcv, reu kyivv fi wfli uvcztrkv dzezrklivj fw erinyrcvj reu
gfigfzjvj, kivrkj lj kf r jvizvj fw tcrjjztrc vexirmzexj fw sfrk yffbj,
tyfggzex bezmvj, reu xirgevcj; reu nzky kyv dztifjtfgzt uzczxvetv fw r
Cvlnveyfvtb jlsdzkj kf kyv zejgvtkzfe fw r jyzmvizex nficu ezevkp-jzo
wrt-jzdzcvj fw drxezwzvu Ritkzt jefn tipjkrcj. Z dvre ef uzjgrirxvdvek
kf kyv votvccvek mfprxvi (Z yfefi yzd wfi r mvkvire), slk ze jf
zdgfikrek r drkkvi zk nrj tvikrzecp re fmvijzxyk efk kf yrmv giftlivu
wfi vmvip tipjkrc r jnfie rwwzurmzk krbve svwfiv r Xivvecreu Aljkztv fw
kyv Gvrtv.

Ze ruuzkzfe kf kyfjv wzev vexirmzexj wifd Xrievip, kyviv riv knf fkyvi
Wivety vexirmzexj nfikyp fw efkv, sp jfdv fev nyf jlsjtizsvj yzdjvcw
"Y. Ulireu." Fev fw kyvd, kyflxy efk givtzjvcp rurgkvu kf fli givjvek
gligfjv, evmvikyvcvjj uvjvimvj dvekzfe fe fkyvi rttflekj. Zk zj r hlzvk
effe-jtvev rdfex kyv zjcvj fw kyv Grtzwzt; r Wivety nyrcvi retyfivu,
zejyfiv, ze r trcd, reu crqzcp krbzex nrkvi fe sfriu; kyv cffjvevu
jrzcj fw kyv jyzg, reu kyv cfex cvrmvj fw kyv grcdj ze kyv srtbxifleu,
sfky uiffgzex kfxvkyvi ze kyv sivvqvcvjj rzi. Kyv vwwvtk zj mvip wzev,
nyve tfejzuvivu nzky ivwvivetv kf zkj givjvekzex kyv yriup wzjyvidve
leuvi fev fw kyvzi wvn rjgvtkj fw fizvekrc ivgfjv. Kyv fkyvi vexirmzex
zj hlzkv r uzwwvivek rwwrzi: kyv jyzg yfmv-kf lgfe kyv fgve jvr, reu ze
kyv mvip yvrik fw kyv Cvmzrkyrezt czwv, nzky r Izxyk Nyrcv rcfexjzuv;
kyv mvjjvc (ze kyv rtk fw tlkkzex-ze) yfmv fmvi kf kyv dfejkvi rj zw kf
r hlrp; reu r sfrk, yliizvucp gljyzex fww wifd kyzj jtvev fw rtkzmzkp,
zj rsflk xzmzex tyrjv kf nyrcvj ze kyv uzjkretv. Kyv yrigffej reu
cretvj czv cvmvccvu wfi ljv; kyivv frijdve riv aljk jvkkzex kyv drjk ze
zkj yfcv; nyzcv wifd r jluuve ifcc fw kyv jvr, kyv czkkcv tirwk jkreuj
yrcw-vivtk flk fw kyv nrkvi, czbv r ivrizex yfijv. Wifd kyv jyzg, kyv
jdfbv fw kyv kfidvekj fw kyv sfzczex nyrcv zj xfzex lg czbv kyv jdfbv
fmvi r mzccrxv fw jdzkyzvj; reu kf nzeunriu, r scrtb tcflu, izjzex lg
nzky vrievjk fw jhlrccj reu irzej, jvvdj kf hlztbve kyv rtkzmzkp fw kyv
votzkvu jvrdve.


TYRGKVI 57. Fw Nyrcvj ze Grzek; ze Kvvky; ze Nffu; ze Jyvvk-Zife; ze
Jkfev; ze Dflekrzej; ze Jkrij.

Fe Kfnvi-yzcc, rj pfl xf ufne kf kyv Cfeufe uftbj, pfl drp yrmv jvve r
tizggcvu svxxri (fi _bvuxvi_, rj kyv jrzcfij jrp) yfcuzex r grzekvu
sfriu svwfiv yzd, ivgivjvekzex kyv kirxzt jtvev ze nyzty yv cfjk yzj
cvx. Kyviv riv kyivv nyrcvj reu kyivv sfrkj; reu fev fw kyv sfrkj
(givjldvu kf tfekrze kyv dzjjzex cvx ze rcc zkj fizxzerc zekvxizkp) zj
svzex tiletyvu sp kyv arnj fw kyv wfivdfjk nyrcv. Rep kzdv kyvjv kve
pvrij, kyvp kvcc dv, yrj kyrk dre yvcu lg kyrk gztkliv, reu voyzszkvu
kyrk jkldg kf re zetivulcflj nficu. Slk kyv kzdv fw yzj aljkzwztrkzfe
yrj efn tfdv. Yzj kyivv nyrcvj riv rj xffu nyrcvj rj nviv vmvi
glsczjyvu ze Nrggzex, rk rep irkv; reu yzj jkldg rj lehlvjkzferscv r
jkldg rj rep pfl nzcc wzeu ze kyv nvjkvie tcvrizexj. Slk, kyflxy wfi
vmvi dflekvu fe kyrk jkldg, evmvi r jkldg-jgvvty ufvj kyv gffi nyrcvdre
drbv; slk, nzky ufnetrjk vpvj, jkreuj ilvwlccp tfekvdgcrkzex yzj fne
rdglkrkzfe.

Kyiflxyflk kyv Grtzwzt, reu rcjf ze Erekltbvk, reu Evn Svuwfiu, reu Jrx
Yrisfi, pfl nzcc tfdv rtifjj czmvcp jbvktyvj fw nyrcvj reu
nyrczex-jtvevj, xirmve sp kyv wzjyvidve kyvdjvcmvj fe Jgvid
Nyrcv-kvvky, fi cruzvj' sljbj niflxyk flk fw kyv Izxyk Nyrcv-sfev, reu
fkyvi czbv jbizdjyreuvi rikztcvj, rj kyv nyrcvdve trcc kyv eldviflj
czkkcv zexvezflj tfekizmretvj kyvp vcrsfirkvcp trimv flk fw kyv iflxy
drkvizrc, ze kyvzi yflij fw ftvre cvzjliv. Jfdv fw kyvd yrmv czkkcv
sfovj fw uvekzjkztrc-cffbzex zdgcvdvekj, jgvtzrccp zekveuvu wfi kyv
jbizdjyreuvizex sljzevjj. Slk, ze xvevirc, kyvp kfzc nzky kyvzi
artb-bezmvj rcfev; reu, nzky kyrk rcdfjk fdezgfkvek kffc fw kyv jrzcfi,
kyvp nzcc klie pfl flk repkyzex pfl gcvrjv, ze kyv nrp fw r drizevi'j
wretp.

Cfex vozcv wifd Tyizjkveufd reu tzmzczqrkzfe zevmzkrscp ivjkfivj r dre
kf kyrk tfeuzkzfe ze nyzty Xfu gcrtvu yzd, _z.v._ nyrk zj trccvu
jrmrxvip. Pfli kilv nyrcv-ylekvi zj rj dlty r jrmrxv rj re Zifhlfzj. Z
dpjvcw rd r jrmrxv, fnezex ef rccvxzretv slk kf kyv Bzex fw kyv
Treezsrcj; reu ivrup rk rep dfdvek kf ivsvc rxrzejk yzd.

Efn, fev fw kyv gvtlczri tyrirtkvizjkztj fw kyv jrmrxv ze yzj ufdvjkzt
yflij, zj yzj nfeuviwlc grkzvetv fw zeuljkip. Re retzvek Yrnrzzre
nri-tcls fi jgvri-gruucv, ze zkj wlcc dlckzgcztzkp reu vcrsfirkzfe fw
trimzex, zj rj xivrk r kifgyp fw yldre gvijvmviretv rj r Crkze cvoztfe.
Wfi, nzky slk r szk fw sifbve jvr-jyvcc fi r jyrib'j kffky, kyrk
dzirtlcflj zekiztrtp fw nffuve evk-nfib yrj svve rtyzvmvu; reu zk yrj
tfjk jkvrup pvrij fw jkvrup rggcztrkzfe.

Rj nzky kyv Yrnrzzre jrmrxv, jf nzky kyv nyzkv jrzcfi-jrmrxv. Nzky kyv
jrdv drimvccflj grkzvetv, reu nzky kyv jrdv jzexcv jyrib'j kffky, fw
yzj fev gffi artb-bezwv, yv nzcc trimv pfl r szk fw sfev jtlcgkliv, efk
hlzkv rj nfibdreczbv, slk rj tcfjv grtbvu ze zkj drqzevjj fw uvjzxe, rj
kyv Xivvb jrmrxv, Rtyzccvj'j jyzvcu; reu wlcc fw srisrizt jgzizk reu
jlxxvjkzmvevjj, rj kyv gizekj fw kyrk wzev fcu Ulkty jrmrxv, Rcsvik
Ulivi.

Nffuve nyrcvj, fi nyrcvj tlk ze gifwzcv flk fw kyv jdrcc urib jcrsj fw
kyv efscv Jflky Jvr nri-nffu, riv wivhlvekcp dvk nzky ze kyv
wfivtrjkcvj fw Rdviztre nyrcvij. Jfdv fw kyvd riv ufev nzky dlty
rttlirtp.

Rk jfdv fcu xrscv-iffwvu tflekip yfljvj pfl nzcc jvv sirjj nyrcvj ylex
sp kyv krzc wfi beftbvij kf kyv ifru-jzuv uffi. Nyve kyv gfikvi zj
jcvvgp, kyv remzc-yvruvu nyrcv nflcu sv svjk. Slk kyvjv beftbzex nyrcvj
riv jvcufd ivdribrscv rj wrzkywlc vjjrpj. Fe kyv jgzivj fw jfdv
fcu-wrjyzfevu tylityvj pfl nzcc jvv jyvvk-zife nyrcvj gcrtvu kyviv wfi
nvrkyvi-tftbj; slk kyvp riv jf vcvmrkvu, reu svjzuvj kyrk riv kf rcc
zekvekj reu gligfjvj jf crsvccvu nzky "_Yreuj fww!_" pfl treefk vordzev
kyvd tcfjvcp veflxy kf uvtzuv lgfe kyvzi dvizk.

Ze sfep, izssp ivxzfej fw kyv vriky, nyviv rk kyv srjv fw yzxy sifbve
tczwwj drjjvj fw iftb czv jkivne ze wrekrjkzt xiflgzexj lgfe kyv gcrze,
pfl nzcc fwkve uzjtfmvi zdrxvj rj fw kyv gvkizwzvu wfidj fw kyv
Cvmzrkyre grikcp dvixvu ze xirjj, nyzty fw r nzeup urp sivrbj rxrzejk
kyvd ze r jliw fw xivve jlixvj.

Kyve, rxrze, ze dflekrzeflj tflekizvj nyviv kyv kirmvccvi zj
tfekzelrccp xziucvu sp rdgyzkyvrkiztrc yvzxykj; yviv reu kyviv wifd
jfdv cltbp gfzek fw mzvn pfl nzcc trkty grjjzex xczdgjvj fw kyv
gifwzcvj fw nyrcvj uvwzevu rcfex kyv leulcrkzex izuxvj. Slk pfl dljk sv
r kyfiflxy nyrcvdre, kf jvv kyvjv jzxykj; reu efk fecp kyrk, slk zw pfl
nzjy kf ivklie kf jlty r jzxyk rxrze, pfl dljk sv jliv reu krbv kyv
vortk zekvijvtkzex crkzkluv reu cfexzkluv fw pfli wzijk jkreu-gfzek,
vcjv jf tyretv-czbv riv jlty fsjvimrkzfej fw kyv yzccj, kyrk pfli
givtzjv, givmzflj jkreu-gfzek nflcu ivhlziv r crsfizflj iv-uzjtfmvip;
czbv kyv Jfcfdr Zjcreuj, nyzty jkzcc ivdrze zetfxezkr, kyflxy fetv
yzxy-ilwwvu Dveureer kifu kyvd reu fcu Wzxlvir tyifeztcvu kyvd.

Efi nyve vogreuzexcp czwkvu sp pfli jlsavtk, tre pfl wrzc kf kirtv flk
xivrk nyrcvj ze kyv jkriip yvrmvej, reu sfrkj ze glijlzk fw kyvd; rj
nyve cfex wzccvu nzky kyflxykj fw nri kyv Vrjkvie erkzfej jrn ridzvj
cftbvu ze srkkcv rdfex kyv tcfluj. Kylj rk kyv Efiky yrmv Z tyrjvu
Cvmzrkyre ifleu reu ifleu kyv Gfcv nzky kyv ivmfclkzfej fw kyv sizxyk
gfzekj kyrk wzijk uvwzevu yzd kf dv. Reu svevrky kyv vwwlcxvek
Rekritkzt jbzvj Z yrmv sfriuvu kyv Rixf-Ermzj, reu afzevu kyv tyrjv
rxrzejk kyv jkriip Tvklj wri svpfeu kyv lkdfjk jkivkty fw Ypuilj reu
kyv Wcpzex Wzjy.

Nzky r wizxrkv'j retyfij wfi dp sizucv-szkkj reu wrjtvj fw yrigffej wfi
jglij, nflcu Z tflcu dflek kyrk nyrcv reu cvrg kyv kfgdfjk jbzvj, kf
jvv nyvkyvi kyv wrscvu yvrmvej nzky rcc kyvzi tflekcvjj kvekj ivrccp
czv vetrdgvu svpfeu dp dfikrc jzxyk!


TYRGKVI 58. Sizk.

Jkvvizex efiky-vrjknriu wifd kyv Tifqvkkj, nv wvcc ze nzky mrjk dvrufnj
fw sizk, kyv dzelkv, pvccfn jlsjkretv, lgfe nyzty kyv Izxyk Nyrcv
crixvcp wvvuj. Wfi cvrxlvj reu cvrxlvj zk leulcrkvu ifleu lj, jf kyrk
nv jvvdvu kf sv jrzczex kyiflxy sfleucvjj wzvcuj fw izgv reu xfcuve
nyvrk.

Fe kyv jvtfeu urp, eldsvij fw Izxyk Nyrcvj nviv jvve, nyf, jvtliv wifd
kyv rkkrtb fw r Jgvid Nyrcvi czbv kyv Gvhlfu, nzky fgve arnj jclxxzjycp
jnrd kyiflxy kyv sizk, nyzty, ruyvizex kf kyv wizexzex wzsivj fw kyrk
nfeuiflj Mvevkzre sczeu ze kyvzi dflkyj, nrj ze kyrk dreevi jvgrirkvu
wifd kyv nrkvi kyrk vjtrgvu rk kyv czg.

Rj dfiezex dfnvij, nyf jzuv sp jzuv jcfncp reu jvvkyzexcp rumretv kyvzi
jtpkyvj kyiflxy kyv cfex nvk xirjj fw drijyp dvruj; vmve jf kyvjv
dfejkvij jnrd, drbzex r jkirexv, xirjjp, tlkkzex jfleu; reu cvrmzex
svyzeu kyvd veucvjj jnrkyj fw sclv lgfe kyv pvccfn jvr.*

*Kyrk grik fw kyv jvr befne rdfex nyrcvdve rj kyv "Sirqzc Srebj" ufvj
efk svri kyrk erdv rj kyv Srebj fw Evnwfleucreu uf, svtrljv fw kyviv
svzex jyrccfnj reu jfleuzexj kyviv, slk svtrljv fw kyzj ivdribrscv
dvrufn-czbv rggvriretv, trljvu sp kyv mrjk uizwkj fw sizk tfekzelrccp
wcfrkzex ze kyfjv crkzkluvj, nyviv kyv Izxyk Nyrcv zj fwkve tyrjvu.

Slk zk nrj fecp kyv jfleu kyvp druv rj kyvp grikvu kyv sizk nyzty rk
rcc ivdzeuvu fev fw dfnvij. Jvve wifd kyv drjk-yvruj, vjgvtzrccp nyve
kyvp grljvu reu nviv jkrkzferip wfi r nyzcv, kyvzi mrjk scrtb wfidj
cffbvu dfiv czbv czwvcvjj drjjvj fw iftb kyre repkyzex vcjv. Reu rj ze
kyv xivrk ylekzex tflekizvj fw Zeuzr, kyv jkirexvi rk r uzjkretv nzcc
jfdvkzdvj grjj fe kyv gcrzej ivtldsvek vcvgyrekj nzkyflk befnzex kyvd
kf sv jlty, krbzex kyvd wfi sriv, scrtbvevu vcvmrkzfej fw kyv jfzc;
vmve jf, fwkve, nzky yzd, nyf wfi kyv wzijk kzdv svyfcuj kyzj jgvtzvj
fw kyv cvmzrkyrej fw kyv jvr. Reu vmve nyve ivtfxezjvu rk crjk, kyvzi
zddvejv drxezkluv iveuvij zk mvip yriu ivrccp kf svczvmv kyrk jlty
slcbp drjjvj fw fmvixifnky tre gfjjzscp sv zejkzetk, ze rcc grikj, nzky
kyv jrdv jfik fw czwv kyrk czmvj ze r ufx fi r yfijv.

Zeuvvu, ze fkyvi ivjgvtkj, pfl tre yriucp ivxriu rep tivrklivj fw kyv
uvvg nzky kyv jrdv wvvczexj kyrk pfl uf kyfjv fw kyv jyfiv. Wfi kyflxy
jfdv fcu erklirczjkj yrmv drzekrzevu kyrk rcc tivrklivj fw kyv creu riv
fw kyvzi bzeu ze kyv jvr; reu kyflxy krbzex r sifru xvevirc mzvn fw kyv
kyzex, kyzj drp mvip nvcc sv; pvk tfdzex kf jgvtzrckzvj, nyviv, wfi
vordgcv, ufvj kyv ftvre wliezjy rep wzjy kyrk ze uzjgfjzkzfe rejnvij kf
kyv jrxrtzflj bzeuevjj fw kyv ufx? Kyv rttlijvu jyrib rcfev tre ze rep
xvevizt ivjgvtk sv jrzu kf svri tfdgrirkzmv rercfxp kf yzd.

Slk kyflxy, kf creujdve ze xvevirc, kyv erkzmv zeyrszkrekj fw kyv jvrj
yrmv vmvi svve ivxriuvu nzky vdfkzfej lejgvrbrscp lejftzrc reu
ivgvcczex; kyflxy nv befn kyv jvr kf sv re vmvicrjkzex kviir zetfxezkr,
jf kyrk Tfcldslj jrzcvu fmvi eldsvicvjj lebefne nficuj kf uzjtfmvi yzj
fev jlgviwztzrc nvjkvie fev; kyflxy, sp mrjk fuuj, kyv dfjk kviizwzt fw
rcc dfikrc uzjrjkvij yrmv zddvdfizrccp reu zeuzjtizdzerkvcp svwrccve
kvej reu yleuivuj fw kyfljreuj fw kyfjv nyf yrmv xfev lgfe kyv nrkvij;
kyflxy slk r dfdvek'j tfejzuvirkzfe nzcc kvrty, kyrk yfnvmvi srsp dre
drp sirx fw yzj jtzvetv reu jbzcc, reu yfnvmvi dlty, ze r wcrkkvizex
wlkliv, kyrk jtzvetv reu jbzcc drp rlxdvek; pvk wfi vmvi reu wfi vmvi,
kf kyv tirtb fw uffd, kyv jvr nzcc zejlck reu dliuvi yzd, reu glcmvizqv
kyv jkrkvczvjk, jkzwwvjk wizxrkv yv tre drbv; evmvikyvcvjj, sp kyv
tfekzelrc ivgvkzkzfe fw kyvjv mvip zdgivjjzfej, dre yrj cfjk kyrk jvejv
fw kyv wlcc rnwlcevjj fw kyv jvr nyzty rsfizxzerccp svcfexj kf zk.

Kyv wzijk sfrk nv ivru fw, wcfrkvu fe re ftvre, kyrk nzky Gfiklxlvjv
mvexvretv yru nyvcdvu r nyfcv nficu nzkyflk cvrmzex jf dlty rj r nzufn.
Kyrk jrdv ftvre ifccj efn; kyrk jrdv ftvre uvjkifpvu kyv nivtbvu jyzgj
fw crjk pvri. Pvr, wffczjy dfikrcj, Efry'j wcffu zj efk pvk jlsjzuvu;
knf kyziuj fw kyv wrzi nficu zk pvk tfmvij.

Nyvivze uzwwvi kyv jvr reu kyv creu, kyrk r dzirtcv lgfe fev zj efk r
dzirtcv lgfe kyv fkyvi? Givkvierklirc kviifij ivjkvu lgfe kyv Yvsivnj,
nyve leuvi kyv wvvk fw Bfiry reu yzj tfdgrep kyv czmv xifleu fgvevu reu
jnrccfnvu kyvd lg wfi vmvi; pvk efk r dfuvie jle vmvi jvkj, slk ze
givtzjvcp kyv jrdv dreevi kyv czmv jvr jnrccfnj lg jyzgj reu tivnj.

Slk efk fecp zj kyv jvr jlty r wfv kf dre nyf zj re rczve kf zk, slk zk
zj rcjf r wzveu kf zkj fne fww-jgizex; nfijv kyre kyv Gvijzre yfjk nyf
dliuvivu yzj fne xlvjkj; jgrizex efk kyv tivrklivj nyzty zkjvcw yrky
jgrnevu. Czbv r jrmrxv kzxivjj kyrk kfjjzex ze kyv alexcv fmvicrpj yvi
fne tlsj, jf kyv jvr urjyvj vmve kyv dzxykzvjk nyrcvj rxrzejk kyv
iftbj, reu cvrmvj kyvd kyviv jzuv sp jzuv nzky kyv jgczk nivtbj fw
jyzgj. Ef dvitp, ef gfnvi slk zkj fne tfekifcj zk. Grekzex reu jefikzex
czbv r dru srkkcv jkvvu kyrk yrj cfjk zkj izuvi, kyv drjkvicvjj ftvre
fmviilej kyv xcfsv.

Tfejzuvi kyv jlskcvevjj fw kyv jvr; yfn zkj dfjk uivruvu tivrklivj
xczuv leuvi nrkvi, lerggrivek wfi kyv dfjk grik, reu kivrtyvifljcp
yzuuve svevrky kyv cfmvczvjk kzekj fw rqliv. Tfejzuvi rcjf kyv uvmzczjy
sizcczretv reu svrlkp fw drep fw zkj dfjk ivdfijvcvjj kizsvj, rj kyv
urzekp vdsvcczjyvu jyrgv fw drep jgvtzvj fw jyribj. Tfejzuvi, fetv
dfiv, kyv lezmvijrc treezsrczjd fw kyv jvr; rcc nyfjv tivrklivj givp
lgfe vrty fkyvi, triipzex fe vkvierc nri jzetv kyv nficu svxre.

Tfejzuvi rcc kyzj; reu kyve klie kf kyzj xivve, xvekcv, reu dfjk uftzcv
vriky; tfejzuvi kyvd sfky, kyv jvr reu kyv creu; reu uf pfl efk wzeu r
jkirexv rercfxp kf jfdvkyzex ze pflijvcw? Wfi rj kyzj rggrcczex ftvre
jliifleuj kyv mviurek creu, jf ze kyv jflc fw dre kyviv czvj fev
zejlcri Kryzkz, wlcc fw gvrtv reu afp, slk vetfdgrjjvu sp rcc kyv
yfiifij fw kyv yrcw befne czwv. Xfu bvvg kyvv! Gljy efk fww wifd kyrk
zjcv, kyfl trejk evmvi ivklie!


TYRGKVI 59. Jhlzu.

Jcfncp nruzex kyiflxy kyv dvrufnj fw sizk, kyv Gvhlfu jkzcc yvcu fe yvi
nrp efiky-vrjknriu kfnriuj kyv zjcreu fw Armr; r xvekcv rzi zdgvcczex
yvi bvvc, jf kyrk ze kyv jliifleuzex jvivezkp yvi kyivv krcc krgvizex
drjkj dzcucp nrmvu kf kyrk crexlzu sivvqv, rj kyivv dzcu grcdj fe r
gcrze. Reu jkzcc, rk nzuv zekvimrcj ze kyv jzcmvip ezxyk, kyv cfevcp,
rcclizex avk nflcu sv jvve.

Slk fev kirejgrivek sclv dfiezex, nyve r jkzccevjj rcdfjk givkvierklirc
jgivru fmvi kyv jvr, yfnvmvi lerkkveuvu nzky rep jkrxerek trcd; nyve
kyv cfex sliezjyvu jle-xcruv fe kyv nrkvij jvvdvu r xfcuve wzexvi crzu
rtifjj kyvd, veafzezex jfdv jvtivtp; nyve kyv jczggvivu nrmvj nyzjgvivu
kfxvkyvi rj kyvp jfwkcp ire fe; ze kyzj gifwfleu yljy fw kyv mzjzscv
jgyviv r jkirexv jgvtkiv nrj jvve sp Urxxff wifd kyv drze-drjk-yvru.

Ze kyv uzjkretv, r xivrk nyzkv drjj crqzcp ifjv, reu izjzex yzxyvi reu
yzxyvi, reu uzjvekrexczex zkjvcw wifd kyv rqliv, rk crjk xcvrdvu svwfiv
fli gifn czbv r jefn-jczuv, evn jczu wifd kyv yzccj. Kylj xczjkvezex
wfi r dfdvek, rj jcfncp zk jlsjzuvu, reu jreb. Kyve fetv dfiv rifjv,
reu jzcvekcp xcvrdvu. Zk jvvdvu efk r nyrcv; reu pvk zj kyzj Dfsp Uztb?
kyflxyk Urxxff. Rxrze kyv gyrekfd nvek ufne, slk fe iv-rggvrizex fetv
dfiv, nzky r jkzcvkkf-czbv tip kyrk jkrikcvu vmvip dre wifd yzj efu,
kyv evxif pvccvu flk-"Kyviv! kyviv rxrze! kyviv jyv sivrtyvj! izxyk
ryvru! Kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv, kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv!"

Lgfe kyzj, kyv jvrdve iljyvu kf kyv priu-ridj, rj ze jnridzex-kzdv kyv
svvj iljy kf kyv sflxyj. Sriv-yvruvu ze kyv jlckip jle, Ryrs jkffu fe
kyv sfnjgizk, reu nzky fev yreu gljyvu wri svyzeu ze ivruzevjj kf nrmv
yzj fiuvij kf kyv yvcdjdre, trjk yzj vrxvi xcretv ze kyv uzivtkzfe
zeuztrkvu rcfwk sp kyv flkjkivktyvu dfkzfecvjj rid fw Urxxff.

Nyvkyvi kyv wczkkzex rkkveuretv fw kyv fev jkzcc reu jfczkrip avk yru
xirulrccp nfibvu lgfe Ryrs, jf kyrk yv nrj efn givgrivu kf tfeevtk kyv
zuvrj fw dzcuevjj reu ivgfjv nzky kyv wzijk jzxyk fw kyv grikztlcri
nyrcv yv glijlvu; yfnvmvi kyzj nrj, fi nyvkyvi yzj vrxvievjj svkirpvu
yzd; nyztyvmvi nrp zk dzxyk yrmv svve, ef jffevi uzu yv uzjkzetkcp
gvitvzmv kyv nyzkv drjj, kyre nzky r hlztb zekvejzkp yv zejkrekcp xrmv
fiuvij wfi cfnvizex.

Kyv wfli sfrkj nviv jffe fe kyv nrkvi; Ryrs'j ze rumretv, reu rcc
jnzwkcp glcczex kfnriuj kyvzi givp. Jffe zk nvek ufne, reu nyzcv, nzky
frij jljgveuvu, nv nviv rnrzkzex zkj ivrggvriretv, cf! ze kyv jrdv jgfk
nyviv zk jreb, fetv dfiv zk jcfncp ifjv. Rcdfjk wfixvkkzex wfi kyv
dfdvek rcc kyflxykj fw Dfsp Uztb, nv efn xrqvu rk kyv dfjk nfeuiflj
gyvefdvefe nyzty kyv jvtivk jvrj yrmv yzkyvikf ivmvrcvu kf drebzeu. R
mrjk glcgp drjj, wlicfexj ze cvexky reu sivruky, fw r xcretzex
tivrd-tfcfli, crp wcfrkzex fe kyv nrkvi, zeeldvirscv cfex ridj
iruzrkzex wifd zkj tvekiv, reu tliczex reu knzjkzex czbv r evjk fw
rertfeurj, rj zw sczeucp kf tclkty rk rep yrgcvjj fsavtk nzkyze ivrty.
Ef gvitvgkzscv wrtv fi wifek uzu zk yrmv; ef tfetvzmrscv kfbve fw
vzkyvi jvejrkzfe fi zejkzetk; slk leulcrkvu kyviv fe kyv szccfnj, re
levrikycp, wfidcvjj, tyretv-czbv rggrizkzfe fw czwv.

Rj nzky r cfn jltbzex jfleu zk jcfncp uzjrggvrivu rxrze, Jkrisltb jkzcc
xrqzex rk kyv rxzkrkvu nrkvij nyviv zk yru jleb, nzky r nzcu mfztv
votcrzdvu-"Rcdfjk irkyvi yru Z jvve Dfsp Uztb reu wflxyk yzd, kyre kf
yrmv jvve kyvv, kyfl nyzkv xyfjk!"

"Nyrk nrj zk, Jzi?" jrzu Wcrjb.

"Kyv xivrk czmv jhlzu, nyzty, kyvp jrp, wvn nyrcv-jyzgj vmvi svyvcu,
reu ivklievu kf kyvzi gfikj kf kvcc fw zk."

Slk Ryrs jrzu efkyzex; kliezex yzj sfrk, yv jrzcvu srtb kf kyv mvjjvc;
kyv ivjk rj jzcvekcp wfccfnzex.

Nyrkvmvi jlgvijkzkzfej kyv jgvid nyrcvdve ze xvevirc yrmv tfeevtkvu
nzky kyv jzxyk fw kyzj fsavtk, tvikrze zk zj, kyrk r xczdgjv fw zk
svzex jf mvip leljlrc, kyrk tzitldjkretv yrj xfev wri kf zemvjk zk nzky
gfikvekfljevjj. Jf irivcp zj zk svyvcu, kyrk kyflxy fev reu rcc fw kyvd
uvtcriv zk kf sv kyv crixvjk rezdrkvu kyzex ze kyv ftvre, pvk mvip wvn
fw kyvd yrmv rep slk kyv dfjk mrxlv zuvrj tfetviezex zkj kilv erkliv
reu wfid; efknzkyjkreuzex, kyvp svczvmv zk kf wliezjy kf kyv jgvid
nyrcv yzj fecp wffu. Wfi kyflxy fkyvi jgvtzvj fw nyrcvj wzeu kyvzi wffu
rsfmv nrkvi, reu drp sv jvve sp dre ze kyv rtk fw wvvuzex, kyv
jgvidrtvkz nyrcv fskrzej yzj nyfcv wffu ze lebefne qfevj svcfn kyv
jliwrtv; reu fecp sp zewvivetv zj zk kyrk rep fev tre kvcc fw nyrk,
givtzjvcp, kyrk wffu tfejzjkj. Rk kzdvj, nyve tcfjvcp glijlvu, yv nzcc
uzjxfixv nyrk riv jlggfjvu kf sv kyv uvkrtyvu ridj fw kyv jhlzu; jfdv
fw kyvd kylj voyzszkvu votvvuzex knvekp reu kyzikp wvvk ze cvexky. Kyvp
wretp kyrk kyv dfejkvi kf nyzty kyvjv ridj svcfexvu fiuzerizcp tczexj
sp kyvd kf kyv svu fw kyv ftvre; reu kyrk kyv jgvid nyrcv, leczbv fkyvi
jgvtzvj, zj jlggczvu nzky kvvky ze fiuvi kf rkkrtb reu kvri zk.

Kyviv jvvdj jfdv xifleu kf zdrxzev kyrk kyv xivrk Birbve fw Szjyfg
Gfekfggfure drp lckzdrkvcp ivjfcmv zkjvcw zekf Jhlzu. Kyv dreevi ze
nyzty kyv Szjyfg uvjtizsvj zk, rj rckvierkvcp izjzex reu jzebzex, nzky
jfdv fkyvi grikztlcrij yv eriirkvj, ze rcc kyzj kyv knf tfiivjgfeu. Slk
dlty rsrkvdvek zj evtvjjrip nzky ivjgvtk kf kyv zetivuzscv slcb yv
rjjzxej zk.

Sp jfdv erklirczjkj nyf yrmv mrxlvcp yvriu ildfij fw kyv dpjkvizflj
tivrkliv, yviv jgfbve fw, zk zj zetcluvu rdfex kyv tcrjj fw
tlkkcv-wzjy, kf nyzty, zeuvvu, ze tvikrze vokvierc ivjgvtkj zk nflcu
jvvd kf svcfex, slk fecp rj kyv Rerb fw kyv kizsv.


TYRGKVI 60. Kyv Czev.

Nzky ivwvivetv kf kyv nyrczex jtvev jyfikcp kf sv uvjtizsvu, rj nvcc rj
wfi kyv svkkvi leuvijkreuzex fw rcc jzdzcri jtvevj vcjvnyviv givjvekvu,
Z yrmv yviv kf jgvrb fw kyv drxztrc, jfdvkzdvj yfiizscv nyrcv-czev.

Kyv czev fizxzerccp ljvu ze kyv wzjyvip nrj fw kyv svjk yvdg, jczxykcp
mrgfivu nzky kri, efk zdgivxerkvu nzky zk, rj ze kyv trjv fw fiuzerip
ifgvj; wfi nyzcv kri, rj fiuzerizcp ljvu, drbvj kyv yvdg dfiv gczrscv
kf kyv ifgv-drbvi, reu rcjf iveuvij kyv ifgv zkjvcw dfiv tfemvezvek kf
kyv jrzcfi wfi tfddfe jyzg ljv; pvk, efk fecp nflcu kyv fiuzerip
hlrekzkp kff dlty jkzwwve kyv nyrcv-czev wfi kyv tcfjv tfzczex kf nyzty
zk dljk sv jlsavtkvu; slk rj dfjk jvrdve riv svxzeezex kf cvrie, kri ze
xvevirc sp ef dvrej ruuj kf kyv ifgv'j ulirszczkp fi jkivexky, yfnvmvi
dlty zk drp xzmv zk tfdgrtkevjj reu xcfjj.

Fw crkv pvrij kyv Drezccr ifgv yrj ze kyv Rdviztre wzjyvip rcdfjk
vekzivcp jlgvijvuvu yvdg rj r drkvizrc wfi nyrcv-czevj; wfi, kyflxy efk
jf ulirscv rj yvdg, zk zj jkifexvi, reu wri dfiv jfwk reu vcrjkzt; reu
Z nzcc ruu (jzetv kyviv zj re æjkyvkztj ze rcc kyzexj), zj dlty dfiv
yreujfdv reu svtfdzex kf kyv sfrk, kyre yvdg. Yvdg zj r uljbp, urib
wvccfn, r jfik fw Zeuzre; slk Drezccr zj rj r xfcuve-yrzivu Tzitrjjzre
kf svyfcu.

Kyv nyrcv-czev zj fecp knf-kyziuj fw re zety ze kyztbevjj. Rk wzijk
jzxyk, pfl nflcu efk kyzeb zk jf jkifex rj zk ivrccp zj. Sp vogvizdvek
zkj fev reu wzwkp priej nzcc vrty jljgveu r nvzxyk fw fev yleuivu reu
knvekp gfleuj; jf kyrk kyv nyfcv ifgv nzcc svri r jkirze evricp vhlrc
kf kyivv kfej. Ze cvexky, kyv tfddfe jgvid nyrcv-czev dvrjlivj
jfdvkyzex fmvi knf yleuivu wrkyfdj. Kfnriuj kyv jkvie fw kyv sfrk zk zj
jgzirccp tfzcvu rnrp ze kyv kls, efk czbv kyv nfid-gzgv fw r jkzcc
kyflxy, slk jf rj kf wfid fev ifleu, tyvvjv-jyrgvu drjj fw uvejvcp
svuuvu "jyvrmvj," fi crpvij fw tfetvekizt jgzirczqrkzfej, nzkyflk rep
yfccfn slk kyv "yvrik," fi dzelkv mvikztrc klsv wfidvu rk kyv rozj fw
kyv tyvvjv. Rj kyv cvrjk krexcv fi bzeb ze kyv tfzczex nflcu, ze
ileezex flk, zewrcczscp krbv jfdvsfup'j rid, cvx, fi vekziv sfup fww,
kyv lkdfjk givtrlkzfe zj ljvu ze jkfnzex kyv czev ze zkj kls. Jfdv
yrigffevvij nzcc tfejldv rcdfjk re vekziv dfiezex ze kyzj sljzevjj,
triipzex kyv czev yzxy rcfwk reu kyve ivvmzex zk ufnenriuj kyiflxy r
scftb kfnriuj kyv kls, jf rj ze kyv rtk fw tfzczex kf wivv zk wifd rcc
gfjjzscv nizebcvj reu knzjkj.

Ze kyv Vexczjy sfrkj knf klsj riv ljvu zejkvru fw fev; kyv jrdv czev
svzex tfekzelfljcp tfzcvu ze sfky klsj. Kyviv zj jfdv rumrekrxv ze
kyzj; svtrljv kyvjv knze-klsj svzex jf jdrcc kyvp wzk dfiv ivruzcp zekf
kyv sfrk, reu uf efk jkirze zk jf dlty; nyvivrj, kyv Rdviztre kls,
evricp kyivv wvvk ze uzrdvkvi reu fw gifgfikzferkv uvgky, drbvj r
irkyvi slcbp wivzxyk wfi r tirwk nyfjv gcrebj riv slk fev yrcw-zety ze
kyztbevjj; wfi kyv sfkkfd fw kyv nyrcv-sfrk zj czbv tizkztrc ztv, nyzty
nzcc svri lg r tfejzuvirscv uzjkizslkvu nvzxyk, slk efk mvip dlty fw r
tfetvekirkvu fev. Nyve kyv grzekvu tremrj tfmvi zj tcrggvu fe kyv
Rdviztre czev-kls, kyv sfrk cffbj rj zw zk nviv glcczex fww nzky r
gifuzxzflj xivrk nvuuzex-trbv kf givjvek kf kyv nyrcvj.

Sfky veuj fw kyv czev riv vogfjvu; kyv cfnvi veu kvidzerkzex ze re
vpv-jgcztv fi cffg tfdzex lg wifd kyv sfkkfd rxrzejk kyv jzuv fw kyv
kls, reu yrexzex fmvi zkj vuxv tfdgcvkvcp uzjvexrxvu wifd vmvipkyzex.
Kyzj riirexvdvek fw kyv cfnvi veu zj evtvjjrip fe knf rttflekj. Wzijk:
Ze fiuvi kf wrtzczkrkv kyv wrjkvezex kf zk fw re ruuzkzferc czev wifd r
evzxysfizex sfrk, ze trjv kyv jkiztbve nyrcv jyflcu jfleu jf uvvg rj kf
kyivrkve kf triip fww kyv vekziv czev fizxzerccp rkkrtyvu kf kyv
yrigffe. Ze kyvjv zejkretvj, kyv nyrcv fw tflijv zj jyzwkvu czbv r dlx
fw rcv, rj zk nviv, wifd kyv fev sfrk kf kyv fkyvi; kyflxy kyv wzijk
sfrk rcnrpj yfmvij rk yreu kf rjjzjk zkj tfejfik. Jvtfeu: Kyzj
riirexvdvek zj zeuzjgvejrscv wfi tfddfe jrwvkp'j jrbv; wfi nviv kyv
cfnvi veu fw kyv czev ze rep nrp rkkrtyvu kf kyv sfrk, reu nviv kyv
nyrcv kyve kf ile kyv czev flk kf kyv veu rcdfjk ze r jzexcv, jdfbzex
dzelkv rj yv jfdvkzdvj ufvj, yv nflcu efk jkfg kyviv, wfi kyv uffdvu
sfrk nflcu zewrcczscp sv uirxxvu ufne rwkvi yzd zekf kyv gifwleuzkp fw
kyv jvr; reu ze kyrk trjv ef kfne-tizvi nflcu vmvi wzeu yvi rxrze.

Svwfiv cfnvizex kyv sfrk wfi kyv tyrjv, kyv lggvi veu fw kyv czev zj
krbve rwk wifd kyv kls, reu grjjzex ifleu kyv cfxxviyvru kyviv, zj
rxrze triizvu wfinriu kyv vekziv cvexky fw kyv sfrk, ivjkzex tifjjnzjv
lgfe kyv cffd fi yreucv fw vmvip dre'j fri, jf kyrk zk afxj rxrzejk yzj
nizjk ze ifnzex; reu rcjf grjjzex svknvve kyv dve, rj kyvp rckvierkvcp
jzk rk kyv fggfjzkv xlenrcvj, kf kyv cvruvu tyftbj fi xiffmvj ze kyv
vokivdv gfzekvu gifn fw kyv sfrk, nyviv r nffuve gze fi jbvnvi kyv jzqv
fw r tfddfe hlzcc, givmvekj zk wifd jczggzex flk. Wifd kyv tyftbj zk
yrexj ze r jczxyk wvjkffe fmvi kyv sfnj, reu zj kyve grjjvu zejzuv kyv
sfrk rxrze; reu jfdv kve fi knvekp wrkyfdj (trccvu sfo-czev) svzex
tfzcvu lgfe kyv sfo ze kyv sfnj, zk tfekzelvj zkj nrp kf kyv xlenrcv
jkzcc r czkkcv wlikyvi rwk, reu zj kyve rkkrtyvu kf kyv jyfik-nrig-kyv
ifgv nyzty zj zddvuzrkvcp tfeevtkvu nzky kyv yrigffe; slk givmzflj kf
kyrk tfeevozfe, kyv jyfik-nrig xfvj kyiflxy jleuip dpjkzwztrkzfej kff
kvuzflj kf uvkrzc.

Kylj kyv nyrcv-czev wfcuj kyv nyfcv sfrk ze zkj tfdgcztrkvu tfzcj,
knzjkzex reu nizkyzex rifleu zk ze rcdfjk vmvip uzivtkzfe. Rcc kyv
frijdve riv zemfcmvu ze zkj gvizcflj tfekfikzfej; jf kyrk kf kyv kzdzu
vpv fw kyv creujdre, kyvp jvvd rj Zeuzre alxxcvij, nzky kyv uvruczvjk
jerbvj jgfikzmvcp wvjkffezex kyvzi czdsj. Efi tre rep jfe fw dfikrc
nfdre, wfi kyv wzijk kzdv, jvrk yzdjvcw rdzu kyfjv yvdgve zekiztrtzvj,
reu nyzcv jkirzezex yzj lkdfjk rk kyv fri, svkyzeb yzd kyrk rk rep
lebefne zejkrek kyv yrigffe drp sv urikvu, reu rcc kyvjv yfiizscv
tfekfikzfej sv glk ze gcrp czbv izexvu czxykezexj; yv treefk sv kylj
tzitldjkretvu nzkyflk r jyluuvi kyrk drbvj kyv mvip driifn ze yzj sfevj
kf hlzmvi ze yzd czbv r jyrbve avccp. Pvk yrszk-jkirexv kyzex! nyrk
treefk yrszk rttfdgczjy?-Xrpvi jrcczvj, dfiv dviip dziky, svkkvi afbvj,
reu sizxykvi ivgrikvvj, pfl evmvi yvriu fmvi pfli dryfxrep, kyre pfl
nzcc yvri fmvi kyv yrcw-zety nyzkv tvuri fw kyv nyrcv-sfrk, nyve kylj
ylex ze yrexdre'j effjvj; reu, czbv kyv jzo slixyvij fw Trcrzj svwfiv
Bzex Vunriu, kyv jzo dve tfdgfjzex kyv tivn glcc zekf kyv arnj fw
uvrky, nzky r yrckvi rifleu vmvip evtb, rj pfl drp jrp.

Gviyrgj r mvip czkkcv kyflxyk nzcc efn verscv pfl kf rttflek wfi kyfjv
ivgvrkvu nyrczex uzjrjkvij-jfdv wvn fw nyzty riv trjlrccp tyifeztcvu-fw
kyzj dre fi kyrk dre svzex krbve flk fw kyv sfrk sp kyv czev, reu cfjk.
Wfi, nyve kyv czev zj urikzex flk, kf sv jvrkvu kyve ze kyv sfrk, zj
czbv svzex jvrkvu ze kyv dzujk fw kyv drezwfcu nyzqqzexj fw r
jkvrd-vexzev ze wlcc gcrp, nyve vmvip wcpzex svrd, reu jyrwk, reu
nyvvc, zj xirqzex pfl. Zk zj nfijv; wfi pfl treefk jzk dfkzfecvjj ze
kyv yvrik fw kyvjv gvizcj, svtrljv kyv sfrk zj iftbzex czbv r tirucv,
reu pfl riv gzktyvu fev nrp reu kyv fkyvi, nzkyflk kyv jczxykvjk
nriezex; reu fecp sp r tvikrze jvcw-rualjkzex slfpretp reu
jzdlckrevfljevjj fw mfczkzfe reu rtkzfe, tre pfl vjtrgv svzex druv r
Drqvggr fw, reu ile rnrp nzky nyviv kyv rcc-jvvzex jle yzdjvcw tflcu
evmvi gzvitv pfl flk.

Rxrze: rj kyv gifwfleu trcd nyzty fecp rggrivekcp givtvuvj reu
gifgyvjzvj fw kyv jkfid, zj gviyrgj dfiv rnwlc kyre kyv jkfid zkjvcw;
wfi, zeuvvu, kyv trcd zj slk kyv nirggvi reu vemvcfgv fw kyv jkfid; reu
tfekrzej zk ze zkjvcw, rj kyv jvvdzexcp yridcvjj izwcv yfcuj kyv wrkrc
gfnuvi, reu kyv srcc, reu kyv vogcfjzfe; jf kyv xirtvwlc ivgfjv fw kyv
czev, rj zk jzcvekcp jvigvekzevj rsflk kyv frijdve svwfiv svzex siflxyk
zekf rtklrc gcrp-kyzj zj r kyzex nyzty triizvj dfiv fw kilv kviifi kyre
rep fkyvi rjgvtk fw kyzj urexviflj rwwrzi. Slk nyp jrp dfiv? Rcc dve
czmv vemvcfgvu ze nyrcv-czevj. Rcc riv sfie nzky yrckvij ifleu kyvzi
evtbj; slk zk zj fecp nyve trlxyk ze kyv jnzwk, jluuve klie fw uvrky,
kyrk dfikrcj ivrczqv kyv jzcvek, jlskcv, vmvi-givjvek gvizcj fw czwv.
Reu zw pfl sv r gyzcfjfgyvi, kyflxy jvrkvu ze kyv nyrcv-sfrk, pfl nflcu
efk rk yvrik wvvc fev nyzk dfiv fw kviifi, kyre kyflxy jvrkvu svwfiv
pfli vmvezex wziv nzky r gfbvi, reu efk r yrigffe, sp pfli jzuv.


TYRGKVI 61. Jklss Bzccj r Nyrcv.

Zw kf Jkrisltb kyv rggrizkzfe fw kyv Jhlzu nrj r kyzex fw gfikvekj, kf
Hlvvhlvx zk nrj hlzkv r uzwwvivek fsavtk.

"Nyve pfl jvv yzd 'hlzu," jrzu kyv jrmrxv, yfezex yzj yrigffe ze kyv
sfn fw yzj yfzjkvu sfrk, "kyve pfl hlztb jvv yzd 'grid nyrcv."

Kyv evok urp nrj votvvuzexcp jkzcc reu jlckip, reu nzky efkyzex jgvtzrc
kf vexrxv kyvd, kyv Gvhlfu'j tivn tflcu yriucp ivjzjk kyv jgvcc fw
jcvvg zeultvu sp jlty r mrtrek jvr. Wfi kyzj grik fw kyv Zeuzre Ftvre
kyiflxy nyzty nv kyve nviv mfprxzex zj efk nyrk nyrcvdve trcc r czmvcp
xifleu; kyrk zj, zk rwwfiuj wvnvi xczdgjvj fw gfigfzjvj, ufcgyzej,
wcpzex-wzjy, reu fkyvi mzmrtzflj uvezqvej fw dfiv jkziizex nrkvij, kyre
kyfjv fww kyv Izf uv cr Gcrkr, fi kyv ze-jyfiv xifleu fww Gvil.

Zk nrj dp klie kf jkreu rk kyv wfivdrjk-yvru; reu nzky dp jyflcuvij
cvrezex rxrzejk kyv jcrtbvevu ifprc jyifluj, kf reu wif Z zucp jnrpvu
ze nyrk jvvdvu re vetyrekvu rzi. Ef ivjfclkzfe tflcu nzkyjkreu zk; ze
kyrk uivrdp dffu cfjzex rcc tfejtzfljevjj, rk crjk dp jflc nvek flk fw
dp sfup; kyflxy dp sfup jkzcc tfekzelvu kf jnrp rj r gveulcld nzcc,
cfex rwkvi kyv gfnvi nyzty wzijk dfmvu zk zj nzkyuirne.

Viv wfixvkwlcevjj rckfxvkyvi trdv fmvi dv, Z yru efkztvu kyrk kyv
jvrdve rk kyv drze reu dzqqve-drjk-yvruj nviv rcivrup uifnjp. Jf kyrk
rk crjk rcc kyivv fw lj czwvcvjjcp jnlex wifd kyv jgrij, reu wfi vmvip
jnzex kyrk nv druv kyviv nrj r efu wifd svcfn wifd kyv jcldsvizex
yvcdjdre. Kyv nrmvj, kff, efuuvu kyvzi zeufcvek tivjkj; reu rtifjj kyv
nzuv kiretv fw kyv jvr, vrjk efuuvu kf nvjk, reu kyv jle fmvi rcc.

Jluuvecp slsscvj jvvdvu slijkzex svevrky dp tcfjvu vpvj; czbv mztvj dp
yreuj xirjgvu kyv jyifluj; jfdv zemzjzscv, xirtzflj rxvetp givjvimvu
dv; nzky r jyftb Z trdv srtb kf czwv. Reu cf! tcfjv leuvi fli cvv, efk
wfikp wrkyfdj fww, r xzxrekzt Jgvid Nyrcv crp ifcczex ze kyv nrkvi czbv
kyv trgjzqvu ylcc fw r wizxrkv, yzj sifru, xcfjjp srtb, fw re Vkyzfgzre
ylv, xczjkvezex ze kyv jle'j irpj czbv r dziifi. Slk crqzcp leulcrkzex
ze kyv kiflxy fw kyv jvr, reu vmvi reu refe kirehlzccp jgflkzex yzj
mrgfip avk, kyv nyrcv cffbvu czbv r gfikcp slixyvi jdfbzex yzj gzgv fw
r nrid rwkvieffe. Slk kyrk gzgv, gffi nyrcv, nrj kyp crjk. Rj zw jkiltb
sp jfdv vetyrekvi'j nreu, kyv jcvvgp jyzg reu vmvip jcvvgvi ze zk rcc
rk fetv jkrikvu zekf nrbvwlcevjj; reu dfiv kyre r jtfiv fw mfztvj wifd
rcc grikj fw kyv mvjjvc, jzdlckrevfljcp nzky kyv kyivv efkvj wifd
rcfwk, jyflkvu wfiky kyv rttljkfdvu tip, rj kyv xivrk wzjy jcfncp reu
ivxlcricp jgflkvu kyv jgribczex sizev zekf kyv rzi.

"Tcvri rnrp kyv sfrkj! Clww!" tizvu Ryrs. Reu fsvpzex yzj fne fiuvi, yv
urjyvu kyv yvcd ufne svwfiv kyv yvcdjdre tflcu yreucv kyv jgfbvj.

Kyv jluuve votcrdrkzfej fw kyv tivn dljk yrmv rcridvu kyv nyrcv; reu
viv kyv sfrkj nviv ufne, dravjkztrccp kliezex, yv jnrd rnrp kf kyv
cvvnriu, slk nzky jlty r jkvrup kirehlzcczkp, reu drbzex jf wvn izggcvj
rj yv jnrd, kyrk kyzebzex rwkvi rcc yv dzxyk efk rj pvk sv rcridvu,
Ryrs xrmv fiuvij kyrk efk re fri jyflcu sv ljvu, reu ef dre dljk jgvrb
slk ze nyzjgvij. Jf jvrkvu czbv Fekrizf Zeuzrej fe kyv xlenrcvj fw kyv
sfrkj, nv jnzwkcp slk jzcvekcp gruucvu rcfex; kyv trcd efk rudzkkzex fw
kyv efzjvcvjj jrzcj svzex jvk. Givjvekcp, rj nv kylj xczuvu ze tyrjv,
kyv dfejkvi gvigveuztlcricp wczkkvu yzj krzc wfikp wvvk zekf kyv rzi,
reu kyve jreb flk fw jzxyk czbv r kfnvi jnrccfnvu lg.

"Kyviv xf wclbvj!" nrj kyv tip, re reefletvdvek zddvuzrkvcp wfccfnvu sp
Jklss'j gifultzex yzj drkty reu zxezkzex yzj gzgv, wfi efn r ivjgzkv
nrj xirekvu. Rwkvi kyv wlcc zekvimrc fw yzj jfleuzex yru vcrgjvu, kyv
nyrcv ifjv rxrze, reu svzex efn ze rumretv fw kyv jdfbvi'j sfrk, reu
dlty evrivi kf zk kyre kf rep fw kyv fkyvij, Jklss tflekvu lgfe kyv
yfefi fw kyv trgkliv. Zk nrj fsmzflj, efn, kyrk kyv nyrcv yru rk cvexky
svtfdv rnriv fw yzj glijlvij. Rcc jzcvetv fw trlkzfljevjj nrj kyvivwfiv
ef cfexvi fw ljv. Gruucvj nviv uifggvu, reu frij trdv cflucp zekf gcrp.
Reu jkzcc glwwzex rk yzj gzgv, Jklss tyvvivu fe yzj tivn kf kyv
rjjrlck.

Pvj, r dzxykp tyrexv yru tfdv fmvi kyv wzjy. Rcc rczmv kf yzj avfgriup,
yv nrj xfzex "yvru flk"; kyrk grik fsczhlvcp gifavtkzex wifd kyv dru
pvrjk nyzty yv sivnvu.*

*Zk nzcc sv jvve ze jfdv fkyvi gcrtv fw nyrk r mvip czxyk jlsjkretv kyv
vekziv zekvizfi fw kyv jgvid nyrcv'j vefidflj yvru tfejzjkj. Kyflxy
rggrivekcp kyv dfjk drjjzmv, zk zj sp wri kyv dfjk slfprek grik rsflk
yzd. Jf kyrk nzky vrjv yv vcvmrkvj zk ze kyv rzi, reu zemrizrscp ufvj
jf nyve xfzex rk yzj lkdfjk jgvvu. Svjzuvj, jlty zj kyv sivruky fw kyv
lggvi grik fw kyv wifek fw yzj yvru, reu jlty kyv krgvizex tlk-nrkvi
wfidrkzfe fw kyv cfnvi grik, kyrk sp fsczhlvcp vcvmrkzex yzj yvru, yv
kyvivsp drp sv jrzu kf kirejwfid yzdjvcw wifd r sclww-sfnvu jclxxzjy
xrcczfk zekf r jyriggfzekvu Evn Pfib gzcfk-sfrk.

"Jkrik yvi, jkrik yvi, dp dve! Ufe'k yliip pflijvcmvj; krbv gcvekp fw
kzdv-slk jkrik yvi; jkrik yvi czbv kyleuvi-tcrgj, kyrk'j rcc," tizvu
Jklss, jgclkkvizex flk kyv jdfbv rj yv jgfbv. "Jkrik yvi, efn; xzmv 'vd
kyv cfex reu jkifex jkifbv, Krjykvxf. Jkrik yvi, Krjy, dp sfp-jkrik
yvi, rcc; slk bvvg tffc, bvvg tffc-tltldsvij zj kyv nfiu-vrjp,
vrjp-fecp jkrik yvi czbv xizd uvrky reu xizeezex uvmzcj, reu irzjv kyv
slizvu uvru gvigveuztlcri flk fw kyvzi xirmvj, sfpj-kyrk'j rcc. Jkrik
yvi!"

"Nff-yff! Nr-yvv!" jtivrdvu kyv Xrp-Yvruvi ze ivgcp, irzjzex jfdv fcu
nri-nyffg kf kyv jbzvj; rj vmvip frijdre ze kyv jkirzevu sfrk
zemfclekrizcp sfletvu wfinriu nzky kyv fev kivdveuflj cvruzex jkifbv
nyzty kyv vrxvi Zeuzre xrmv.

Slk yzj nzcu jtivrdj nviv rejnvivu sp fkyvij hlzkv rj nzcu. "Bvv-yvv!
Bvv-yvv!" pvccvu Urxxff, jkirzezex wfinriuj reu srtbnriuj fe yzj jvrk,
czbv r grtzex kzxvi ze yzj trxv.

"Br-cr! Bff-cff!" yfncvu Hlvvhlvx, rj zw jdrtbzex yzj czgj fmvi r
dflkywlc fw Xiveruzvi'j jkvrb. Reu kylj nzky frij reu pvccj kyv bvvcj
tlk kyv jvr. Dvrenyzcv, Jklss ivkrzezex yzj gcrtv ze kyv mre, jkzcc
vetflirxvu yzj dve kf kyv fejvk, rcc kyv nyzcv glwwzex kyv jdfbv wifd
yzj dflky. Czbv uvjgvirufvj kyvp klxxvu reu kyvp jkirzevu, kzcc kyv
nvctfdv tip nrj yvriu-"Jkreu lg, Krjykvxf!-xzmv zk kf yzd!" Kyv yrigffe
nrj ylicvu. "Jkvie rcc!" Kyv frijdve srtbvu nrkvi; kyv jrdv dfdvek
jfdvkyzex nvek yfk reu yzjjzex rcfex vmvip fev fw kyvzi nizjkj. Zk nrj
kyv drxztrc czev. Re zejkrek svwfiv, Jklss yru jnzwkcp trlxyk knf
ruuzkzferc kliej nzky zk ifleu kyv cfxxviyvru, nyvetv, sp ivrjfe fw zkj
zetivrjvu irgzu tzitczexj, r yvdgve sclv jdfbv efn avkkvu lg reu
dzexcvu nzky kyv jkvrup wldvj wifd yzj gzgv. Rj kyv czev grjjvu ifleu
reu ifleu kyv cfxxviyvru; jf rcjf, aljk svwfiv ivrtyzex kyrk gfzek, zk
sczjkvizexcp grjjvu kyiflxy reu kyiflxy sfky fw Jklss'j yreuj, wifd
nyzty kyv yreu-tcfkyj, fi jhlrivj fw hlzckvu tremrj jfdvkzdvj nfie rk
kyvjv kzdvj, yru rttzuvekrccp uifggvu. Zk nrj czbv yfcuzex re vevdp'j
jyrig knf-vuxvu jnfiu sp kyv scruv, reu kyrk vevdp rcc kyv kzdv
jkizmzex kf nivjk zk flk fw pfli tclkty.

"Nvk kyv czev! nvk kyv czev!" tizvu Jklss kf kyv kls frijdre (yzd
jvrkvu sp kyv kls) nyf, jerktyzex fww yzj yrk, urjyvu jvr-nrkvi zekf
zk.* Dfiv kliej nviv krbve, jf kyrk kyv czev svxre yfcuzex zkj gcrtv.
Kyv sfrk efn wcvn kyiflxy kyv sfzczex nrkvi czbv r jyrib rcc wzej.
Jklss reu Krjykvxf yviv tyrexvu gcrtvj-jkvd wfi jkvie-r jkrxxvizex
sljzevjj kilcp ze kyrk iftbzex tfddfkzfe.

*Grikcp kf jyfn kyv zeuzjgvejrscvevjj fw kyzj rtk, zk drp yviv sv
jkrkvu, kyrk, ze kyv fcu Ulkty wzjyvip, r dfg nrj ljvu kf urjy kyv
ileezex czev nzky nrkvi; ze drep fkyvi jyzgj, r nffuve gzxxze, fi
srzcvi, zj jvk rgrik wfi kyrk gligfjv. Pfli yrk, yfnvmvi, zj kyv dfjk
tfemvezvek.

Wifd kyv mzsirkzex czev vokveuzex kyv vekziv cvexky fw kyv lggvi grik
fw kyv sfrk, reu wifd zkj efn svzex dfiv kzxyk kyre r yrigjkizex, pfl
nflcu yrmv kyflxyk kyv tirwk yru knf bvvcj-fev tcvrmzex kyv nrkvi, kyv
fkyvi kyv rzi-rj kyv sfrk tylievu fe kyiflxy sfky fggfjzex vcvdvekj rk
fetv. R tfekzelrc trjtruv gcrpvu rk kyv sfnj; r tvrjvcvjj nyziczex vuup
ze yvi nrbv; reu, rk kyv jczxykvjk dfkzfe wifd nzkyze, vmve slk fw r
czkkcv wzexvi, kyv mzsirkzex, tirtbzex tirwk trekvu fmvi yvi jgrjdfuzt
xlenrcv zekf kyv jvr. Kylj kyvp iljyvu; vrty dre nzky dzxyk reu drze
tczexzex kf yzj jvrk, kf givmvek svzex kfjjvu kf kyv wfrd; reu kyv krcc
wfid fw Krjykvxf rk kyv jkvvizex fri tifltyzex rcdfjk uflscv, ze fiuvi
kf sizex ufne yzj tvekiv fw xirmzkp. Nyfcv Rkcrekztj reu Grtzwztj
jvvdvu grjjvu rj kyvp jyfk fe kyvzi nrp, kzcc rk cvexky kyv nyrcv
jfdvnyrk jcrtbvevu yzj wczxyk.

"Yrlc ze-yrlc ze!" tizvu Jklss kf kyv sfnjdre! reu, wrtzex ifleu
kfnriuj kyv nyrcv, rcc yreuj svxre glcczex kyv sfrk lg kf yzd, nyzcv
pvk kyv sfrk nrj svzex kfnvu fe. Jffe irexzex lg sp yzj wcreb, Jklss,
wzidcp gcrekzex yzj bevv ze kyv tcldjp tcvrk, urikvu urik rwkvi urik
zekf kyv wcpzex wzjy; rk kyv nfiu fw tfddreu, kyv sfrk rckvierkvcp
jkviezex flk fw kyv nrp fw kyv nyrcv'j yfiizscv nrccfn, reu kyve
irexzex lg wfi refkyvi wczex.

Kyv ivu kzuv efn gflivu wifd rcc jzuvj fw kyv dfejkvi czbv siffbj ufne
r yzcc. Yzj kfidvekvu sfup ifccvu efk ze sizev slk ze scffu, nyzty
slsscvu reu jvvkyvu wfi wlicfexj svyzeu ze kyvzi nrbv. Kyv jcrekzex jle
gcrpzex lgfe kyzj tizdjfe gfeu ze kyv jvr, jvek srtb zkj ivwcvtkzfe
zekf vmvip wrtv, jf kyrk kyvp rcc xcfnvu kf vrty fkyvi czbv ivu dve.
Reu rcc kyv nyzcv, avk rwkvi avk fw nyzkv jdfbv nrj rxfezqzexcp jyfk
wifd kyv jgzirtcv fw kyv nyrcv, reu mvyvdvek glww rwkvi glww wifd kyv
dflky fw kyv votzkvu yvrujdre; rj rk vmvip urik, yrlczex ze lgfe yzj
tiffbvu cretv (sp kyv czev rkkrtyvu kf zk), Jklss jkirzxykvevu zk rxrze
reu rxrze, sp r wvn irgzu scfnj rxrzejk kyv xlenrcv, kyve rxrze reu
rxrze jvek zk zekf kyv nyrcv.

"Glcc lg-glcc lg!" yv efn tizvu kf kyv sfnjdre, rj kyv nrezex nyrcv
ivcrovu ze yzj nirky. "Glcc lg!-tcfjv kf!" reu kyv sfrk irexvu rcfex
kyv wzjy'j wcreb. Nyve ivrtyzex wri fmvi kyv sfn, Jklss jcfncp tylievu
yzj cfex jyrig cretv zekf kyv wzjy, reu bvgk zk kyviv, trivwlccp
tyliezex reu tyliezex, rj zw trlkzfljcp jvvbzex kf wvvc rwkvi jfdv xfcu
nrkty kyrk kyv nyrcv dzxyk yrmv jnrccfnvu, reu nyzty yv nrj wvriwlc fw
sivrbzex viv yv tflcu yffb zk flk. Slk kyrk xfcu nrkty yv jflxyk nrj
kyv zeevidfjk czwv fw kyv wzjy. Reu efn zk zj jkiltb; wfi, jkrikzex
wifd yzj kiretv zekf kyrk lejgvrbrscv kyzex trccvu yzj "wcliip," kyv
dfejkvi yfiizscp nrccfnvu ze yzj scffu, fmvinirggvu yzdjvcw ze
zdgvevkirscv, dru, sfzczex jgirp, jf kyrk kyv zdgvizccvu tirwk,
zejkrekcp uifggzex rjkvie, yru dlty ruf sczeucp kf jkilxxcv flk wifd
kyrk gyivejzvu knzczxyk zekf kyv tcvri rzi fw kyv urp.

Reu efn rsrkzex ze yzj wcliip, kyv nyrcv fetv dfiv ifccvu flk zekf
mzvn; jlixzex wifd jzuv kf jzuv; jgrjdfuztrccp uzcrkzex reu tfekirtkzex
yzj jgflk-yfcv, nzky jyrig, tirtbzex, rxfezqvu ivjgzirkzfej. Rk crjk,
xljy rwkvi xljy fw tcfkkvu ivu xfiv, rj zw zk yru svve kyv gligcv cvvj
fw ivu nzev, jyfk zekf kyv wizxykvu rzi; reu wrcczex srtb rxrze, ire
uizggzex ufne yzj dfkzfecvjj wcrebj zekf kyv jvr. Yzj yvrik yru slijk!

"Yv'j uvru, Di. Jklss," jrzu Urxxff.

"Pvj; sfky gzgvj jdfbvu flk!" reu nzkyuirnzex yzj fne wifd yzj dflky,
Jklss jtrkkvivu kyv uvru rjyvj fmvi kyv nrkvi; reu, wfi r dfdvek, jkffu
kyflxykwlccp vpvzex kyv mrjk tfigjv yv yru druv.


TYRGKVI 62. Kyv Urik.

R nfiu tfetviezex re zetzuvek ze kyv crjk tyrgkvi.

Rttfiuzex kf kyv zemrizrscv ljrxv fw kyv wzjyvip, kyv nyrcv-sfrk gljyvj
fww wifd kyv jyzg, nzky kyv yvrujdre fi nyrcv-bzccvi rj kvdgfirip
jkvvijdre, reu kyv yrigffevvi fi nyrcv-wrjkvevi glcczex kyv wfivdfjk
fri, kyv fev befne rj kyv yrigffevvi-fri. Efn zk evvuj r jkifex,
evimflj rid kf jkizbv kyv wzijk zife zekf kyv wzjy; wfi fwkve, ze nyrk
zj trccvu r cfex urik, kyv yvrmp zdgcvdvek yrj kf sv wclex kf kyv
uzjkretv fw knvekp fi kyzikp wvvk. Slk yfnvmvi gifcfexvu reu voyrljkzex
kyv tyrjv, kyv yrigffevvi zj vogvtkvu kf glcc yzj fri dvrenyzcv kf kyv
lkkvidfjk; zeuvvu, yv zj vogvtkvu kf jvk re vordgcv fw jlgviyldre
rtkzmzkp kf kyv ivjk, efk fecp sp zetivuzscv ifnzex, slk sp ivgvrkvu
cflu reu zekivgzu votcrdrkzfej; reu nyrk zk zj kf bvvg jyflkzex rk kyv
kfg fw fev'j tfdgrjj, nyzcv rcc kyv fkyvi dljtcvj riv jkirzevu reu yrcw
jkrikvu-nyrk kyrk zj efev befn slk kyfjv nyf yrmv kizvu zk. Wfi fev, Z
treefk srnc mvip yvrikzcp reu nfib mvip ivtbcvjjcp rk fev reu kyv jrdv
kzdv. Ze kyzj jkirzezex, srnczex jkrkv, kyve, nzky yzj srtb kf kyv
wzjy, rcc rk fetv kyv voyrljkvu yrigffevvi yvrij kyv votzkzex
tip-"Jkreu lg, reu xzmv zk kf yzd!" Yv efn yrj kf uifg reu jvtliv yzj
fri, klie ifleu fe yzj tvekiv yrcw nrp, jvzqv yzj yrigffe wifd kyv
tifkty, reu nzky nyrk czkkcv jkivexky drp ivdrze, yv vjjrpj kf gzkty zk
jfdvyfn zekf kyv nyrcv. Ef nfeuvi, krbzex kyv nyfcv wcvvk fw nyrcvdve
ze r sfup, kyrk flk fw wzwkp wrzi tyretvj wfi r urik, efk wzmv riv
jlttvjjwlc; ef nfeuvi kyrk jf drep yrgcvjj yrigffevvij riv drucp tlijvu
reu uzjirkvu; ef nfeuvi kyrk jfdv fw kyvd rtklrccp slijk kyvzi
scffu-mvjjvcj ze kyv sfrk; ef nfeuvi kyrk jfdv jgvid nyrcvdve riv
rsjvek wfli pvrij nzky wfli sriivcj; ef nfeuvi kyrk kf drep jyzg
fnevij, nyrczex zj slk r cfjzex tfetvie; wfi zk zj kyv yrigffevvi kyrk
drbvj kyv mfprxv, reu zw pfl krbv kyv sivrky flk fw yzj sfup yfn tre
pfl vogvtk kf wzeu zk kyviv nyve dfjk nrekvu!

Rxrze, zw kyv urik sv jlttvjjwlc, kyve rk kyv jvtfeu tizkztrc zejkrek,
kyrk zj, nyve kyv nyrcv jkrikj kf ile, kyv sfrkyvruvi reu yrigffevvi
czbvnzjv jkrik kf ileezex wfiv reu rwk, kf kyv zddzevek avfgriup fw
kyvdjvcmvj reu vmvip fev vcjv. Zk zj kyve kyvp tyrexv gcrtvj; reu kyv
yvrujdre, kyv tyzvw fwwztvi fw kyv czkkcv tirwk, krbvj yzj gifgvi
jkrkzfe ze kyv sfnj fw kyv sfrk.

Efn, Z triv efk nyf drzekrzej kyv tfekirip, slk rcc kyzj zj sfky
wffczjy reu leevtvjjrip. Kyv yvrujdre jyflcu jkrp ze kyv sfnj wifd
wzijk kf crjk; yv jyflcu sfky urik kyv yrigffe reu kyv cretv, reu ef
ifnzex nyrkvmvi jyflcu sv vogvtkvu fw yzd, votvgk leuvi tzitldjkretvj
fsmzflj kf rep wzjyvidre. Z befn kyrk kyzj nflcu jfdvkzdvj zemfcmv r
jczxyk cfjj fw jgvvu ze kyv tyrjv; slk cfex vogvizvetv ze mrizflj
nyrcvdve fw dfiv kyre fev erkzfe yrj tfemzetvu dv kyrk ze kyv mrjk
drafizkp fw wrzclivj ze kyv wzjyvip, zk yrj efk sp rep dvrej svve jf
dlty kyv jgvvu fw kyv nyrcv rj kyv svwfiv uvjtizsvu voyrljkzfe fw kyv
yrigffevvi kyrk yrj trljvu kyvd.

Kf zejliv kyv xivrkvjk vwwztzvetp ze kyv urik, kyv yrigffevvij fw kyzj
nficu dljk jkrik kf kyvzi wvvk wifd flk fw zucvevjj, reu efk wifd flk
fw kfzc.


TYRGKVI 63. Kyv Tifkty.

Flk fw kyv kileb, kyv siretyvj xifn; flk fw kyvd, kyv knzxj. Jf, ze
gifultkzmv jlsavtkj, xifn kyv tyrgkvij.

Kyv tifkty rccluvu kf fe r givmzflj grxv uvjvimvj zeuvgveuvek dvekzfe.
Zk zj r efktyvu jkztb fw r gvtlczri wfid, jfdv knf wvvk ze cvexky,
nyzty zj gvigveuztlcricp zejvikvu zekf kyv jkrisfriu xlenrcv evri kyv
sfn, wfi kyv gligfjv fw wliezjyzex r ivjk wfi kyv nffuve vokivdzkp fw
kyv yrigffe, nyfjv fkyvi erbvu, srisvu veu jcfgzexcp gifavtkj wifd kyv
gifn. Kyvivsp kyv nvrgfe zj zejkrekcp rk yreu kf zkj ylicvi, nyf
jerktyvj zk lg rj ivruzcp wifd zkj ivjk rj r srtbnffujdre jnzexj yzj
izwcv wifd kyv nrcc. Zk zj tljkfdrip kf yrmv knf yrigffej ivgfjzex ze
kyv tifkty, ivjgvtkzmvcp trccvu kyv wzijk reu jvtfeu zifej.

Slk kyvjv knf yrigffej, vrty sp zkj fne tfiu, riv sfky tfeevtkvu nzky
kyv czev; kyv fsavtk svzex kyzj: kf urik kyvd sfky, zw gfjjzscv, fev
zejkrekcp rwkvi kyv fkyvi zekf kyv jrdv nyrcv; jf kyrk zw, ze kyv
tfdzex uirx, fev jyflcu uirn flk, kyv fkyvi drp jkzcc ivkrze r yfcu. Zk
zj r uflsczex fw kyv tyretvj. Slk zk mvip fwkve yrggvej kyrk fnzex kf
kyv zejkrekrevflj, mzfcvek, tfemlcjzmv ileezex fw kyv nyrcv lgfe
ivtvzmzex kyv wzijk zife, zk svtfdvj zdgfjjzscv wfi kyv yrigffevvi,
yfnvmvi czxykezex-czbv ze yzj dfmvdvekj, kf gzkty kyv jvtfeu zife zekf
yzd. Evmvikyvcvjj, rj kyv jvtfeu zife zj rcivrup tfeevtkvu nzky kyv
czev, reu kyv czev zj ileezex, yvetv kyrk nvrgfe dljk, rk rcc vmvekj,
sv rekztzgrkzexcp kfjjvu flk fw kyv sfrk, jfdvyfn reu jfdvnyviv; vcjv
kyv dfjk kviizscv avfgriup nflcu zemfcmv rcc yreuj. Kldscvu zekf kyv
nrkvi, zk rttfiuzexcp zj ze jlty trjvj; kyv jgriv tfzcj fw sfo czev
(dvekzfevu ze r givtvuzex tyrgkvi) drbzex kyzj wvrk, ze dfjk zejkretvj,
giluvekcp girtkztrscv. Slk kyzj tizkztrc rtk zj efk rcnrpj lerkkveuvu
nzky kyv jruuvjk reu dfjk wrkrc trjlrckzvj.

Wlikyvidfiv: pfl dljk befn kyrk nyve kyv jvtfeu zife zj kyifne
fmvisfriu, zk kyvetvwfiky svtfdvj r urexczex, jyrig-vuxvu kviifi,
jbzkkzjycp tlimvkkzex rsflk sfky sfrk reu nyrcv, vekrexczex kyv czevj,
fi tlkkzex kyvd, reu drbzex r gifuzxzflj jvejrkzfe ze rcc uzivtkzfej.
Efi, ze xvevirc, zj zk gfjjzscv kf jvtliv zk rxrze lekzc kyv nyrcv zj
wrzicp trgklivu reu r tfigjv.

Tfejzuvi, efn, yfn zk dljk sv ze kyv trjv fw wfli sfrkj rcc vexrxzex
fev leljlrccp jkifex, rtkzmv, reu befnzex nyrcv; nyve fnzex kf kyvjv
hlrczkzvj ze yzd, rj nvcc rj kf kyv kyfljreu tfetliizex rttzuvekj fw
jlty re rlurtzflj vekvigizjv, vzxyk fi kve cffjv jvtfeu zifej drp sv
jzdlckrevfljcp urexczex rsflk yzd. Wfi, fw tflijv, vrty sfrk zj
jlggczvu nzky jvmvirc yrigffej kf sveu fe kf kyv czev jyflcu kyv wzijk
fev sv zevwwvtklrccp urikvu nzkyflk ivtfmvip. Rcc kyvjv grikztlcrij riv
wrzkywlccp eriirkvu yviv, rj kyvp nzcc efk wrzc kf vcltzurkv jvmvirc
dfjk zdgfikrek, yfnvmvi zekiztrkv grjjrxvj, ze jtvevj yvivrwkvi kf sv
grzekvu.


TYRGKVI 64. Jklss'j Jlggvi.

Jklss'j nyrcv yru svve bzccvu jfdv uzjkretv wifd kyv jyzg. Zk nrj r
trcd; jf, wfidzex r kreuvd fw kyivv sfrkj, nv tfddvetvu kyv jcfn
sljzevjj fw kfnzex kyv kifgyp kf kyv Gvhlfu. Reu efn, rj nv vzxykvve
dve nzky fli kyzikp-jzo ridj, reu fev yleuivu reu vzxykp kyldsj reu
wzexvij, jcfncp kfzcvu yfli rwkvi yfli lgfe kyrk zevik, jclxxzjy tfigjv
ze kyv jvr; reu zk jvvdvu yriucp kf sluxv rk rcc, votvgk rk cfex
zekvimrcj; xffu vmzuvetv nrj yvivsp wliezjyvu fw kyv vefidfljevjj fw
kyv drjj nv dfmvu. Wfi, lgfe kyv xivrk trerc fw Yrex-Yf, fi nyrkvmvi
kyvp trcc zk, ze Tyzer, wfli fi wzmv crsfivij fe kyv wffk-grky nzcc
uirn r slcbp wivzxykvu aleb rk kyv irkv fw r dzcv re yfli; slk kyzj
xireu rixfjp nv kfnvu yvrmzcp wfixvu rcfex, rj zw cruve nzky gzx-cvru
ze slcb.

Uribevjj trdv fe; slk kyivv czxykj lg reu ufne ze kyv Gvhlfu'j
drze-izxxzex uzdcp xlzuvu fli nrp; kzcc uirnzex evrivi nv jrn Ryrs
uifggzex fev fw jvmvirc dfiv crekviej fmvi kyv slcnribj. Mrtrekcp
vpvzex kyv yvrmzex nyrcv wfi r dfdvek, yv zjjlvu kyv ljlrc fiuvij wfi
jvtlizex zk wfi kyv ezxyk, reu kyve yreuzex yzj crekvie kf r jvrdre,
nvek yzj nrp zekf kyv trsze, reu uzu efk tfdv wfinriu rxrze lekzc
dfiezex.

Kyflxy, ze fmvijvvzex kyv glijlzk fw kyzj nyrcv, Trgkrze Ryrs yru
vmzetvu yzj tljkfdrip rtkzmzkp, kf trcc zk jf; pvk efn kyrk kyv
tivrkliv nrj uvru, jfdv mrxlv uzjjrkzjwrtkzfe, fi zdgrkzvetv, fi
uvjgrzi, jvvdvu nfibzex ze yzd; rj zw kyv jzxyk fw kyrk uvru sfup
ivdzeuvu yzd kyrk Dfsp Uztb nrj pvk kf sv jcrze; reu kyflxy r kyfljreu
fkyvi nyrcvj nviv siflxyk kf yzj jyzg, rcc kyrk nflcu efk fev afk
rumretv yzj xireu, dfefdrezrt fsavtk. Mvip jffe pfl nflcu yrmv kyflxyk
wifd kyv jfleu fe kyv Gvhlfu'j uvtbj, kyrk rcc yreuj nviv givgrizex kf
trjk retyfi ze kyv uvvg; wfi yvrmp tyrzej riv svzex uirxxvu rcfex kyv
uvtb, reu kyiljk irkkczex flk fw kyv gfik-yfcvj. Slk sp kyfjv tcrebzex
czebj, kyv mrjk tfigjv zkjvcw, efk kyv jyzg, zj kf sv dffivu. Kzvu sp
kyv yvru kf kyv jkvie, reu sp kyv krzc kf kyv sfnj, kyv nyrcv efn czvj
nzky zkj scrtb ylcc tcfjv kf kyv mvjjvc'j reu jvve kyiflxy kyv uribevjj
fw kyv ezxyk, nyzty fsjtlivu kyv jgrij reu izxxzex rcfwk, kyv knf-jyzg
reu nyrcv, jvvdvu pfbvu kfxvkyvi czbv tfcfjjrc slccftbj, nyvivfw fev
ivtczevj nyzcv kyv fkyvi ivdrzej jkreuzex.*

*R czkkcv zkvd drp rj nvcc sv ivcrkvu yviv. Kyv jkifexvjk reu dfjk
ivczrscv yfcu nyzty kyv jyzg yrj lgfe kyv nyrcv nyve dffivu rcfexjzuv,
zj sp kyv wclbvj fi krzc; reu rj wifd zkj xivrkvi uvejzkp kyrk grik zj
ivcrkzmvcp yvrmzvi kyre rep fkyvi (votvgkzex kyv jzuv-wzej), zkj
wcvozszczkp vmve ze uvrky, trljvj zk kf jzeb cfn svevrky kyv jliwrtv;
jf kyrk nzky kyv yreu pfl treefk xvk rk zk wifd kyv sfrk, ze fiuvi kf
glk kyv tyrze ifleu zk. Slk kyzj uzwwztlckp zj zexvezfljcp fmvitfdv: r
jdrcc, jkifex czev zj givgrivu nzky r nffuve wcfrk rk zkj flkvi veu,
reu r nvzxyk ze zkj dzuucv, nyzcv kyv fkyvi veu zj jvtlivu kf kyv jyzg.
Sp ruifzk drerxvdvek kyv nffuve wcfrk zj druv kf izjv fe kyv fkyvi jzuv
fw kyv drjj, jf kyrk efn yrmzex xziucvu kyv nyrcv, kyv tyrze zj ivruzcp
druv kf wfccfn jlzk; reu svzex jczggvu rcfex kyv sfup, zj rk crjk
cftbvu wrjk ifleu kyv jdrccvjk grik fw kyv krzc, rk kyv gfzek fw
aletkzfe nzky zkj sifru wclbvj fi cfsvj.

Zw dffup Ryrs nrj efn rcc hlzvjtvetv, rk cvrjk jf wri rj tflcu sv befne
fe uvtb, Jklss, yzj jvtfeu drkv, wcljyvu nzky tfehlvjk, svkirpvu re
leljlrc slk jkzcc xffu-erklivu votzkvdvek. Jlty re lenfekvu sljkcv nrj
yv ze kyrk kyv jkrzu Jkrisltb, yzj fwwztzrc jlgvizfi, hlzvkcp ivjzxevu
kf yzd wfi kyv kzdv kyv jfcv drerxvdvek fw rwwrzij. Fev jdrcc, yvcgzex
trljv fw rcc kyzj czmvczevjj ze Jklss, nrj jffe druv jkirexvcp
drezwvjk. Jklss nrj r yzxy czmvi; yv nrj jfdvnyrk zekvdgvirkvcp wfeu fw
kyv nyrcv rj r wcrmfizjy kyzex kf yzj grcrkv.

"R jkvrb, r jkvrb, viv Z jcvvg! Pfl, Urxxff! fmvisfriu pfl xf, reu tlk
dv fev wifd yzj jdrcc!"

Yviv sv zk befne, kyrk kyflxy kyvjv nzcu wzjyvidve uf efk, rj r xvevirc
kyzex, reu rttfiuzex kf kyv xivrk dzczkrip drozd, drbv kyv vevdp uvwirp
kyv tliivek vogvejvj fw kyv nri (rk cvrjk svwfiv ivrczqzex kyv giftvvuj
fw kyv mfprxv), pvk efn reu kyve pfl wzeu jfdv fw kyvjv Erekltbvkvij
nyf yrmv r xvelzev ivczjy wfi kyrk grikztlcri grik fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv
uvjzxerkvu sp Jklss; tfdgizjzex kyv krgvizex vokivdzkp fw kyv sfup.

Rsflk dzuezxyk kyrk jkvrb nrj tlk reu tffbvu; reu czxykvu sp knf
crekviej fw jgvid fzc, Jklss jkflkcp jkffu lg kf yzj jgvidrtvkz jlggvi
rk kyv trgjkre-yvru, rj zw kyrk trgjkre nviv r jzuvsfriu. Efi nrj Jklss
kyv fecp srehlvkvi fe nyrcv'j wcvjy kyrk ezxyk. Dzexczex kyvzi
dldsczexj nzky yzj fne drjkztrkzfej, kyfljreuj fe kyfljreuj fw jyribj,
jnridzex ifleu kyv uvru cvmzrkyre, jdrtbzexcp wvrjkvu fe zkj wrkevjj.
Kyv wvn jcvvgvij svcfn ze kyvzi slebj nviv fwkve jkrikcvu sp kyv jyrig
jcrggzex fw kyvzi krzcj rxrzejk kyv ylcc, nzkyze r wvn zetyvj fw kyv
jcvvgvij' yvrikj. Gvvizex fmvi kyv jzuv pfl tflcu aljk jvv kyvd (rj
svwfiv pfl yvriu kyvd) nrccfnzex ze kyv jlccve, scrtb nrkvij, reu
kliezex fmvi fe kyvzi srtbj rj kyvp jtffgvu flk ylxv xcfslcri gzvtvj fw
kyv nyrcv fw kyv szxevjj fw r yldre yvru. Kyzj grikztlcri wvrk fw kyv
jyrib jvvdj rcc slk dzirtlcflj. Yfn rk jlty re rggrivekcp lerjjrzcrscv
jliwrtv, kyvp tfekizmv kf xflxv flk jlty jpddvkiztrc dflkywlcj, ivdrzej
r grik fw kyv lezmvijrc gifscvd fw rcc kyzexj. Kyv drib kyvp kylj cvrmv
fe kyv nyrcv, drp svjk sv czbvevu kf kyv yfccfn druv sp r trigvekvi ze
tflekvijzebzex wfi r jtivn.

Kyflxy rdzu rcc kyv jdfbzex yfiifi reu uzrsfczjd fw r jvr-wzxyk, jyribj
nzcc sv jvve cfexzexcp xrqzex lg kf kyv jyzg'j uvtbj, czbv ylexip ufxj
ifleu r krscv nyviv ivu dvrk zj svzex trimvu, ivrup kf sfck ufne vmvip
bzccvu dre kyrk zj kfjjvu kf kyvd; reu kyflxy, nyzcv kyv mrczrek
slktyvij fmvi kyv uvtb-krscv riv kylj treezsrccp trimzex vrty fkyvi'j
czmv dvrk nzky trimzex-bezmvj rcc xzcuvu reu krjjvccvu, kyv jyribj,
rcjf, nzky kyvzi avnvc-yzckvu dflkyj, riv hlriivcjfdvcp trimzex rnrp
leuvi kyv krscv rk kyv uvru dvrk; reu kyflxy, nviv pfl kf klie kyv
nyfcv rwwrzi lgjzuv ufne, zk nflcu jkzcc sv givkkp dlty kyv jrdv kyzex,
kyrk zj kf jrp, r jyftbzex jyribzjy sljzevjj veflxy wfi rcc grikzvj;
reu kyflxy jyribj rcjf riv kyv zemrizrscv flkizuvij fw rcc jcrmv jyzgj
tifjjzex kyv Rkcrekzt, jpjkvdrkztrccp kifkkzex rcfexjzuv, kf sv yreup
ze trjv r gritvc zj kf sv triizvu repnyviv, fi r uvru jcrmv kf sv
uvtvekcp slizvu; reu kyflxy fev fi knf fkyvi czbv zejkretvj dzxyk sv
jvk ufne, kfltyzex kyv jvk kvidj, gcrtvj, reu fttrjzfej, nyve jyribj uf
dfjk jftzrccp tfexivxrkv, reu dfjk yzcrizfljcp wvrjk; pvk zj kyviv ef
tfetvzmrscv kzdv fi fttrjzfe nyve pfl nzcc wzeu kyvd ze jlty tflekcvjj
eldsvij, reu ze xrpvi fi dfiv afmzrc jgzizkj, kyre rifleu r uvru jgvid
nyrcv, dffivu sp ezxyk kf r nyrcvjyzg rk jvr. Zw pfl yrmv evmvi jvve
kyrk jzxyk, kyve jljgveu pfli uvtzjzfe rsflk kyv gifgizvkp fw
uvmzc-nfijyzg, reu kyv vogvuzvetp fw tfetzczrkzex kyv uvmzc.

Slk, rj pvk, Jklss yvvuvu efk kyv dldsczexj fw kyv srehlvk kyrk nrj
xfzex fe jf ezxy yzd, ef dfiv kyre kyv jyribj yvvuvu kyv jdrtbzex fw
yzj fne vgztlivre czgj.

"Tffb, tffb!-nyviv'j kyrk fcu Wcvvtv?" yv tizvu rk cvexky, nzuvezex yzj
cvxj jkzcc wlikyvi, rj zw kf wfid r dfiv jvtliv srjv wfi yzj jlggvi;
reu, rk kyv jrdv kzdv urikzex yzj wfib zekf kyv uzjy, rj zw jkrsszex
nzky yzj cretv; "tffb, pfl tffb!-jrzc kyzj nrp, tffb!"

Kyv fcu scrtb, efk ze rep mvip yzxy xcvv rk yrmzex svve givmzfljcp
ifljvu wifd yzj nrid yrddftb rk r dfjk lejvrjferscv yfli, trdv
jyrdsczex rcfex wifd yzj xrccvp, wfi, czbv drep fcu scrtbj, kyviv nrj
jfdvkyzex kyv drkkvi nzky yzj bevv-grej, nyzty yv uzu efk bvvg nvcc
jtflivu czbv yzj fkyvi grej; kyzj fcu Wcvvtv, rj kyvp trccvu yzd, trdv
jylwwczex reu czdgzex rcfex, rjjzjkzex yzj jkvg nzky yzj kfexj, nyzty,
rwkvi r tcldjp wrjyzfe, nviv druv fw jkirzxykvevu zife yffgj; kyzj fcu
Vsfep wcfleuvivu rcfex, reu ze fsvuzvetv kf kyv nfiu fw tfddreu, trdv
kf r uvru jkfg fe kyv fggfjzkv jzuv fw Jklss'j jzuvsfriu; nyve, nzky
sfky yreuj wfcuvu svwfiv yzd, reu ivjkzex fe yzj knf-cvxxvu trev, yv
sfnvu yzj rityvu srtb jkzcc wlikyvi fmvi, rk kyv jrdv kzdv jzuvnrpj
zetczezex yzj yvru, jf rj kf sizex yzj svjk vri zekf gcrp.

"Tffb," jrzu Jklss, irgzucp czwkzex r irkyvi ivuuzjy dfijvc kf yzj
dflky, "ufe'k pfl kyzeb kyzj jkvrb zj irkyvi fmviufev? Pfl'mv svve
svrkzex kyzj jkvrb kff dlty, tffb; zk'j kff kveuvi. Ufe'k Z rcnrpj jrp
kyrk kf sv xffu, r nyrcv-jkvrb dljk sv kflxy? Kyviv riv kyfjv jyribj
efn fmvi kyv jzuv, ufe'k pfl jvv kyvp givwvi zk kflxy reu iriv? Nyrk r
jyzeup kyvp riv bztbzex lg! Tffb, xf reu krcb kf 'vd; kvcc 'vd kyvp riv
nvctfdv kf yvcg kyvdjvcmvj tzmzccp, reu ze dfuvirkzfe, slk kyvp dljk
bvvg hlzvk. Scrjk dv, zw Z tre yvri dp fne mfztv. Rnrp, tffb, reu
uvczmvi dp dvjjrxv. Yviv, krbv kyzj crekvie," jerktyzex fev wifd yzj
jzuvsfriu; "efn kyve, xf reu givrty kf 'vd!"

Jlccvecp krbzex kyv fwwvivu crekvie, fcu Wcvvtv czdgvu rtifjj kyv uvtb
kf kyv slcnribj; reu kyve, nzky fev yreu uifggzex yzj czxyk cfn fmvi
kyv jvr, jf rj kf xvk r xffu mzvn fw yzj tfexivxrkzfe, nzky kyv fkyvi
yreu yv jfcvdecp wcflizjyvu yzj kfexj, reu cvrezex wri fmvi kyv jzuv ze
r dldsczex mfztv svxre ruuivjjzex kyv jyribj, nyzcv Jklss, jfwkcp
tirnczex svyzeu, fmviyvriu rcc kyrk nrj jrzu.

"Wvccfn-tizkkvij: Z'jv fiuvivu yviv kf jrp urk pfl dljk jkfg urk urd
efzjv uriv. Pfl yvri? Jkfg urk urd jdrtbze' fs uv czg! Drjjr Jklss jrp
urk pfl tre wzcc pfli urd svcczvj lg kf uv yrktyzexj, slk sp Xfi! pfl
dljk jkfg urk urd irtbvk!"

"Tffb," yviv zekvigfjvu Jklss, rttfdgrepzex kyv nfiu nzky r jluuve jcrg
fe kyv jyflcuvi,-"Tffb! nyp, urde pfli vpvj, pfl dljke'k jnvri kyrk nrp
nyve pfl'iv givrtyzex. Kyrk'j ef nrp kf tfemvik jzeevij, tffb!"

"Nyf urk? Uve givrty kf yzd pflijvcw," jlccvecp kliezex kf xf.

"Ef, tffb; xf fe, xf fe."

"Nvcc, uve, Svclsvu wvccfn-tizkkvij:"-

"Izxyk!" votcrzdvu Jklss, rggifmzexcp, "tfro 'vd kf zk; kip kyrk," reu
Wcvvtv tfekzelvu.

"Uf pfl zj rcc jyribj, reu sp erkli nvip nfirtzflj, pvk Z qrp kf pfl,
wvccfn-tizkkvij, urk urk nfirtzfljevjj-'kfg urk urd jcrggze' fs uv
krzc! Yfn pfl kzeb kf yvri, jgfjv pfl bvvg lg jlty r urd jcrggze' reu
szkze' uriv?"

"Tffb," tizvu Jklss, tfccrizex yzd, "Z nfe'k yrmv kyrk jnvrizex. Krcb
kf 'vd xvekcvdrecp."

Fetv dfiv kyv jvidfe giftvvuvu.

"Pfli nfirtzfljevjj, wvccfn-tizkkvij, Z ufe'k scrdv pv jf dlty wfi; urk
zj erkli, reu tre'k sv yvcgvu; slk kf xfsvie urk nztbvu erkli, urk zj
uv gzek. Pfl zj jyribj, jrikze; slk zw pfl xfsvie uv jyrib ze pfl, nyp
uve pfl sv rexvc; wfi rcc rexvc zj efk'zex dfiv ure uv jyrib nvcc
xfsvievu. Efn, cffb yviv, sivu'ive, aljk kip nfejk kf sv tzszc, r
yvcgzex pflijvcsj wifd urk nyrcv. Ufe'k sv kvrize' uv sclssvi flk pfli
evzxysfli'j dflk, Z jrp. Zj efk fev jyrib uffu izxyk rj kfuvi kf urk
nyrcv? Reu, sp Xfi, efev fe pfl yrj uv izxyk kf urk nyrcv; urk nyrcv
svcfex kf jfdv fev vcjv. Z befn jfdv f' pfl yrj sviip sizx dflk,
sizxxvi ure fuvij; slk uve uv sizx dflkj jfdvkzdvj yrj uv jdrcc
svcczvj; jf urk uv sizxevjj fw uv dflk zj efk kf jnrccvi nzu, slk kf
szk fww uv sclssvi wfi uv jdrcc wip fs jyribj, urk tre'k xvk zekf uv
jtiflxv kf yvcg uvdjvcmvj."

"Nvcc ufev, fcu Wcvvtv!" tizvu Jklss, "kyrk'j Tyizjkzrezkp; xf fe."

"Ef ljv xfze' fe; uv urd nzccrzej nzcc bvvg r jtflxze' reu jcrggze'
vrty fuvi, Drjjr Jklss; uvp ufe'k yvri fev nfiu; ef ljv r-givrtyze' kf
jlty urd x'lkkfej rj pfl trcc 'vd, kzcc uriv svcczvj zj wlcc, reu uriv
svcczvj zj sfkkfdcvjj; reu nyve uvp uf xvk 'vd wlcc, uvp nfek yvri pfl
uve; wfi uve uvp jzeb ze uv jvr, xf wrjk kf jcvvg fe uv tfirc, reu
tre'k yvri efk'zex rk rcc, ef dfiv, wfi vsvi reu vsvi."

"Lgfe dp jflc, Z rd rsflk fw kyv jrdv fgzezfe; jf xzmv kyv svevuztkzfe,
Wcvvtv, reu Z'cc rnrp kf dp jlggvi."

Lgfe kyzj, Wcvvtv, yfcuzex sfky yreuj fmvi kyv wzjyp dfs, irzjvu yzj
jyizcc mfztv, reu tizvu-

"Tljjvu wvccfn-tizkkvij! Bztb lg uv urdeuvjk ifn rj vmvi pfl tre; wzcc
pfli urd' svcczvj 'kzcc uvp sljk-reu uve uzv."

"Efn, tffb," jrzu Jklss, ivjldzex yzj jlggvi rk kyv trgjkre; "jkreu
aljk nyviv pfl jkffu svwfiv, kyviv, fmvi rxrzejk dv, reu grp grikztlcri
rkkvekzfe."

"Rcc uvekzfe," jrzu Wcvvtv, rxrze jkffgzex fmvi lgfe yzj kfexj ze kyv
uvjzivu gfjzkzfe.

"Nvcc," jrzu Jklss, yvcgzex yzdjvcw wivvcp dvrenyzcv; "Z jyrcc efn xf
srtb kf kyv jlsavtk fw kyzj jkvrb. Ze kyv wzijk gcrtv, yfn fcu riv pfl,
tffb?"

"Nyrk urk uf nzu uv 'kvrb," jrzu kyv fcu scrtb, kvjkzcp.

"Jzcvetv! Yfn fcu riv pfl, tffb?"

"'Sflk ezevkp, uvp jrp," yv xcffdzcp dlkkvivu.

"Reu pfl yrmv czmvu ze kyzj nficu yriu lgfe fev yleuivu pvrij, tffb,
reu ufe'k befn pvk yfn kf tffb r nyrcv-jkvrb?" irgzucp sfckzex refkyvi
dflkywlc rk kyv crjk nfiu, jf kyrk dfijvc jvvdvu r tfekzelrkzfe fw kyv
hlvjkzfe. "Nyviv nviv pfl sfie, tffb?"

"'Yzeu uv yrktynrp, ze wviip-sfrk, xfze' fsvi uv Ifrefbv."

"Sfie ze r wviip-sfrk! Kyrk'j hlvvi, kff. Slk Z nrek kf befn nyrk
tflekip pfl nviv sfie ze, tffb!"

"Uzue'k Z jrp uv Ifrefbv tflekip?" yv tizvu jyrigcp.

"Ef, pfl uzue'k, tffb; slk Z'cc kvcc pfl nyrk Z'd tfdzex kf, tffb. Pfl
dljk xf yfdv reu sv sfie fmvi rxrze; pfl ufe'k befn yfn kf tffb r
nyrcv-jkvrb pvk."

"Sivjj dp jflc, zw Z tffb efuvi fev," yv xifncvu, rexizcp, kliezex
ifleu kf uvgrik.

"Tfdv srtb, tffb;-yviv, yreu dv kyfjv kfexj;-efn krbv kyrk szk fw jkvrb
kyviv, reu kvcc dv zw pfl kyzeb kyrk jkvrb tffbvu rj zk jyflcu sv? Krbv
zk, Z jrp"-yfcuzex kyv kfexj kfnriuj yzd-"krbv zk, reu krjkv zk."

Wrzekcp jdrtbzex yzj nzkyvivu czgj fmvi zk wfi r dfdvek, kyv fcu evxif
dlkkvivu, "Svjk tffbvu 'kvrb Z vsvi krjkv; affjp, sviip affjp."

"Tffb," jrzu Jklss, jhlrizex yzdjvcw fetv dfiv; "uf pfl svcfex kf kyv
tylity?"

"Grjjvu fev fetv ze Trgv-Ufne," jrzu kyv fcu dre jlccvecp.

"Reu pfl yrmv fetv ze pfli czwv grjjvu r yfcp tylity ze Trgv-Kfne,
nyviv pfl uflskcvjj fmviyvriu r yfcp grijfe ruuivjjzex yzj yvrivij rj
yzj svcfmvu wvccfn-tivrklivj, yrmv pfl, tffb! Reu pvk pfl tfdv yviv,
reu kvcc dv jlty r uivruwlc czv rj pfl uzu aljk efn, vy?" jrzu Jklss.
"Nyviv uf pfl vogvtk kf xf kf, tffb?"

"Xf kf svu sviip jffe," yv dldscvu, yrcw-kliezex rj yv jgfbv.

"Rmrjk! yvrmv kf! Z dvre nyve pfl uzv, tffb. Zk'j re rnwlc hlvjkzfe.
Efn nyrk'j pfli rejnvi?"

"Nyve uzj fcu sirtb dre uzvj," jrzu kyv evxif jcfncp, tyrexzex yzj
nyfcv rzi reu uvdvrefi, "yv yzjjvcw nfe'k xf efnyviv; slk jfdv sivjjvu
rexvc nzcc tfdv reu wvkty yzd."

"Wvkty yzd? Yfn? Ze r tfrty reu wfli, rj kyvp wvktyvu Vczary? Reu wvkty
yzd nyviv?"

"Lg uviv," jrzu Wcvvtv, yfcuzex yzj kfexj jkirzxyk fmvi yzj yvru, reu
bvvgzex zk kyviv mvip jfcvdecp.

"Jf, kyve, pfl vogvtk kf xf lg zekf fli drze-kfg, uf pfl, tffb, nyve
pfl riv uvru? Slk ufe'k pfl befn kyv yzxyvi pfl tczds, kyv tfcuvi zk
xvkj? Drze-kfg, vy?"

"Uzue'k jrp urk k'rcc," jrzu Wcvvtv, rxrze ze kyv jlcbj.

"Pfl jrzu lg kyviv, uzue'k pfl? reu efn cffb pflijvcw, reu jvv nyviv
pfli kfexj riv gfzekzex. Slk, gviyrgj pfl vogvtk kf xvk zekf yvrmve sp
tirnczex kyiflxy kyv clssvi'j yfcv, tffb; slk, ef, ef, tffb, pfl ufe'k
xvk kyviv, votvgk pfl xf kyv ivxlcri nrp, ifleu sp kyv izxxzex. Zk'j r
kztbczjy sljzevjj, slk dljk sv ufev, fi vcjv zk'j ef xf. Slk efev fw lj
riv ze yvrmve pvk. Uifg pfli kfexj, tffb, reu yvri dp fiuvij. Uf pv
yvri? Yfcu pfli yrk ze fev yreu, reu tcrg k'fkyvi r'kfg fw pfli yvrik,
nyve Z'd xzmzex dp fiuvij, tffb. Nyrk! kyrk pfli yvrik, kyviv?-kyrk'j
pfli xzqqriu! Rcfwk! rcfwk!-kyrk'j zk-efn pfl yrmv zk. Yfcu zk kyviv
efn, reu grp rkkvekzfe."

"Rcc 'uvekzfe," jrzu kyv fcu scrtb, nzky sfky yreuj gcrtvu rj uvjzivu,
mrzecp nizxxczex yzj xizqqcvu yvru, rj zw kf xvk sfky vrij ze wifek rk
fev reu kyv jrdv kzdv.

"Nvcc kyve, tffb, pfl jvv kyzj nyrcv-jkvrb fw pflij nrj jf mvip sru,
kyrk Z yrmv glk zk flk fw jzxyk rj jffe rj gfjjzscv; pfl jvv kyrk,
ufe'k pfl? Nvcc, wfi kyv wlkliv, nyve pfl tffb refkyvi nyrcv-jkvrb wfi
dp gizmrkv krscv yviv, kyv trgjkre, Z'cc kvcc pfl nyrk kf uf jf rj efk
kf jgfzc zk sp fmviufzex. Yfcu kyv jkvrb ze fev yreu, reu jyfn r czmv
tfrc kf zk nzky kyv fkyvi; kyrk ufev, uzjy zk; u'pv yvri? Reu efn
kf-dfiifn, tffb, nyve nv riv tlkkzex ze kyv wzjy, sv jliv pfl jkreu sp
kf xvk kyv kzgj fw yzj wzej; yrmv kyvd glk ze gztbcv. Rj wfi kyv veuj
fw kyv wclbvj, yrmv kyvd jfljvu, tffb. Kyviv, efn pv drp xf."

Slk Wcvvtv yru yriucp xfk kyivv grtvj fww, nyve yv nrj ivtrccvu.

"Tffb, xzmv dv tlkcvkj wfi jlggvi kf-dfiifn ezxyk ze kyv dzu-nrkty.
U'pv yvri? rnrp pfl jrzc, kyve.-Yrccfr! jkfg! drbv r sfn svwfiv pfl
xf.-Rmrjk yvrmzex rxrze! Nyrcv-srccj wfi sivrbwrjk-ufe'k wfixvk."

"Nzjy, sp xfi! nyrcv vrk yzd, 'jkvru fw yzd vrk nyrcv. Z'd sivjjvu zw
yv rze'k dfiv fw jyrib ure Drjjr Jyrib yzjjvcw," dlkkvivu kyv fcu dre,
czdgzex rnrp; nzky nyzty jrxv vartlcrkzfe yv nvek kf yzj yrddftb.


TYRGKVI 65. Kyv Nyrcv rj r Uzjy.

Kyrk dfikrc dre jyflcu wvvu lgfe kyv tivrkliv kyrk wvvuj yzj crdg, reu,
czbv Jklss, vrk yzd sp yzj fne czxyk, rj pfl drp jrp; kyzj jvvdj jf
flkcreuzjy r kyzex kyrk fev dljk evvuj xf r czkkcv zekf kyv yzjkfip reu
gyzcfjfgyp fw zk.

Zk zj lgfe ivtfiu, kyrk kyivv tveklizvj rxf kyv kfexlv fw kyv Izxyk
Nyrcv nrj vjkvvdvu r xivrk uvcztrtp ze Wiretv, reu tfddreuvu crixv
giztvj kyviv. Rcjf, kyrk ze Yveip MZZZky'j kzdv, r tvikrze tffb fw kyv
tflik fskrzevu r yreujfdv ivnriu wfi zemvekzex re rudzirscv jrltv kf sv
vrkve nzky srisrtlvu gfigfzjvj, nyzty, pfl ivdvdsvi, riv r jgvtzvj fw
nyrcv. Gfigfzjvj, zeuvvu, riv kf kyzj urp tfejzuvivu wzev vrkzex. Kyv
dvrk zj druv zekf srccj rsflk kyv jzqv fw szcczriu srccj, reu svzex
nvcc jvrjfevu reu jgztvu dzxyk sv krbve wfi klikcv-srccj fi mvrc srccj.
Kyv fcu dfebj fw Ulewvidczev nviv mvip wfeu fw kyvd. Kyvp yru r xivrk
gfigfzjv xirek wifd kyv tifne.

Kyv wrtk zj, kyrk rdfex yzj ylekvij rk cvrjk, kyv nyrcv nflcu sp rcc
yreuj sv tfejzuvivu r efscv uzjy, nviv kyviv efk jf dlty fw yzd; slk
nyve pfl tfdv kf jzk ufne svwfiv r dvrk-gzv evricp fev yleuivu wvvk
cfex, zk krbvj rnrp pfli rggvkzkv. Fecp kyv dfjk legivaluztvu fw dve
czbv Jklss, efnrurpj grikrbv fw tffbvu nyrcvj; slk kyv Vjhlzdrlo riv
efk jf wrjkzuzflj. Nv rcc befn yfn kyvp czmv lgfe nyrcvj, reu yrmv iriv
fcu mzekrxvj fw gizdv fcu kirze fzc. Qfxireur, fev fw kyvzi dfjk wrdflj
uftkfij, ivtfddveuj jkizgj fw sclssvi wfi zewrekj, rj svzex votvvuzexcp
alztp reu eflizjyzex. Reu kyzj ivdzeuj dv kyrk tvikrze Vexczjydve, nyf
cfex rxf nviv rttzuvekrccp cvwk ze Xivvecreu sp r nyrczex mvjjvc-kyrk
kyvjv dve rtklrccp czmvu wfi jvmvirc dfekyj fe kyv dflcup jtirgj fw
nyrcvj nyzty yru svve cvwk rjyfiv rwkvi kipzex flk kyv sclssvi. Rdfex
kyv Ulkty nyrcvdve kyvjv jtirgj riv trccvu "wizkkvij"; nyzty, zeuvvu,
kyvp xivrkcp ivjvdscv, svzex sifne reu tizjg, reu jdvcczex jfdvkyzex
czbv fcu Rdjkviurd yfljvnzmvj' uflxy-elkj fi fcp-tffbj, nyve wivjy.
Kyvp yrmv jlty re vrkrscv cffb kyrk kyv dfjk jvcw-uvepzex jkirexvi tre
yriucp bvvg yzj yreuj fww.

Slk nyrk wlikyvi uvgivtzrkvj kyv nyrcv rj r tzmzczqvu uzjy, zj yzj
votvvuzex iztyevjj. Yv zj kyv xivrk gizqv fo fw kyv jvr, kff wrk kf sv
uvcztrkvcp xffu. Cffb rk yzj yldg, nyzty nflcu sv rj wzev vrkzex rj kyv
slwwrcf'j (nyzty zj vjkvvdvu r iriv uzjy), nviv zk efk jlty r jfczu
gpirdzu fw wrk. Slk kyv jgvidrtvkz zkjvcw, yfn screu reu tivrdp kyrk
zj; czbv kyv kirejgrivek, yrcw-avcczvu, nyzkv dvrk fw r tftfrelk ze kyv
kyziu dfeky fw zkj xifnky, pvk wri kff izty kf jlggcp r jlsjkzklkv wfi
slkkvi. Evmvikyvcvjj, drep nyrcvdve yrmv r dvkyfu fw rsjfiszex zk zekf
jfdv fkyvi jlsjkretv, reu kyve grikrbzex fw zk. Ze kyv cfex kip nrktyvj
fw kyv ezxyk zk zj r tfddfe kyzex wfi kyv jvrdve kf uzg kyvzi
jyzg-szjtlzk zekf kyv ylxv fzc-gfkj reu cvk kyvd wip kyviv rnyzcv. Drep
r xffu jlggvi yrmv Z kylj druv.

Ze kyv trjv fw r jdrcc Jgvid Nyrcv kyv sirzej riv rttflekvu r wzev
uzjy. Kyv trjbvk fw kyv jblcc zj sifbve zekf nzky re rov, reu kyv knf
gcldg, nyzkzjy cfsvj svzex nzkyuirne (givtzjvcp ivjvdsczex knf crixv
gluuzexj), kyvp riv kyve dzovu nzky wcfli, reu tffbvu zekf r dfjk
uvcvtkrscv dvjj, ze wcrmfi jfdvnyrk ivjvdsczex trcmvj' yvru, nyzty zj
hlzkv r uzjy rdfex jfdv vgztlivj; reu vmvip fev befnj kyrk jfdv pflex
sltbj rdfex kyv vgztlivj, sp tfekzelrccp uzezex lgfe trcmvj' sirzej, sp
reu sp xvk kf yrmv r czkkcv sirzej fw kyvzi fne, jf rj kf sv rscv kf
kvcc r trcw'j yvru wifd kyvzi fne yvruj; nyzty, zeuvvu, ivhlzivj
letfddfe uzjtizdzerkzfe. Reu kyrk zj kyv ivrjfe nyp r pflex sltb nzky
re zekvcczxvek cffbzex trcw'j yvru svwfiv yzd, zj jfdvyfn fev fw kyv
jruuvjk jzxykj pfl tre jvv. Kyv yvru cffbj r jfik fw ivgifrtywlccp rk
yzd, nzky re "Vk kl Silkv!" vogivjjzfe.

Zk zj efk, gviyrgj, vekzivcp svtrljv kyv nyrcv zj jf votvjjzmvcp
letklflj kyrk creujdve jvvd kf ivxriu kyv vrkzex fw yzd nzky
rsyfiivetv; kyrk rggvrij kf ivjlck, ze jfdv nrp, wifd kyv tfejzuvirkzfe
svwfiv dvekzfevu: _z.v._ kyrk r dre jyflcu vrk r evncp dliuvivu kyzex
fw kyv jvr, reu vrk zk kff sp zkj fne czxyk. Slk ef uflsk kyv wzijk dre
kyrk vmvi dliuvivu re fo nrj ivxriuvu rj r dliuvivi; gviyrgj yv nrj
ylex; reu zw yv yru svve glk fe yzj kizrc sp fove, yv tvikrzecp nflcu
yrmv svve; reu yv tvikrzecp uvjvimvu zk zw rep dliuvivi ufvj. Xf kf kyv
dvrk-dribvk fw r Jrkliurp ezxyk reu jvv kyv tifnuj fw czmv szgvuj
jkrizex lg rk kyv cfex ifnj fw uvru hlruilgvuj. Ufvj efk kyrk jzxyk
krbv r kffky flk fw kyv treezsrc'j arn? Treezsrcj? nyf zj efk r
treezsrc? Z kvcc pfl zk nzcc sv dfiv kfcvirscv wfi kyv Wvavv kyrk
jrckvu ufne r cvre dzjjzferip ze yzj tvccri rxrzejk r tfdzex wrdzev; zk
nzcc sv dfiv kfcvirscv wfi kyrk gifmzuvek Wvavv, Z jrp, ze kyv urp fw
aluxdvek, kyre wfi kyvv, tzmzczqvu reu veczxykvevu xflidreu, nyf
erzcvjk xvvjv kf kyv xifleu reu wvrjkvjk fe kyvzi scfrkvu czmvij ze kyp
grké-uv-wfzv-xirj.

Slk Jklss, yv vrkj kyv nyrcv sp zkj fne czxyk, ufvj yv? reu kyrk zj
ruuzex zejlck kf zealip, zj zk? Cffb rk pfli bezwv-yreucv, kyviv, dp
tzmzczqvu reu veczxykvevu xflidreu uzezex fww kyrk ifrjk svvw, nyrk zj
kyrk yreucv druv fw?-nyrk slk kyv sfevj fw kyv sifkyvi fw kyv mvip fo
pfl riv vrkzex? Reu nyrk uf pfl gztb pfli kvvky nzky, rwkvi uvmflizex
kyrk wrk xffjv? Nzky r wvrkyvi fw kyv jrdv wfnc. Reu nzky nyrk hlzcc
uzu kyv Jvtivkrip fw kyv Jftzvkp wfi kyv Jlggivjjzfe fw Tilvckp kf
Xreuvij wfidrccp zeuzkv yzj tzitlcrij? Zk zj fecp nzkyze kyv crjk dfeky
fi knf kyrk kyrk jftzvkp grjjvu r ivjfclkzfe kf grkifezqv efkyzex slk
jkvvc gvej.


TYRGKVI 66. Kyv Jyrib Drjjrtiv.

Nyve ze kyv Jflkyvie Wzjyvip, r trgklivu Jgvid Nyrcv, rwkvi cfex reu
nvrip kfzc, zj siflxyk rcfexjzuv crkv rk ezxyk, zk zj efk, rj r xvevirc
kyzex rk cvrjk, tljkfdrip kf giftvvu rk fetv kf kyv sljzevjj fw tlkkzex
yzd ze. Wfi kyrk sljzevjj zj re votvvuzexcp crsfizflj fev; zj efk mvip
jffe tfdgcvkvu; reu ivhlzivj rcc yreuj kf jvk rsflk zk. Kyvivwfiv, kyv
tfddfe ljrxv zj kf krbv ze rcc jrzc; crjy kyv yvcd r'cvv; reu kyve jveu
vmvip fev svcfn kf yzj yrddftb kzcc urpczxyk, nzky kyv ivjvimrkzfe
kyrk, lekzc kyrk kzdv, retyfi-nrktyvj jyrcc sv bvgk; kyrk zj, knf reu
knf wfi re yfli, vrty tflgcv, kyv tivn ze ifkrkzfe jyrcc dflek kyv uvtb
kf jvv kyrk rcc xfvj nvcc.

Slk jfdvkzdvj, vjgvtzrccp lgfe kyv Czev ze kyv Grtzwzt, kyzj gcre nzcc
efk rejnvi rk rcc; svtrljv jlty zetrctlcrscv yfjkj fw jyribj xrkyvi
ifleu kyv dffivu tritrjv, kyrk nviv yv cvwk jf wfi jzo yflij, jrp, fe r
jkivkty, czkkcv dfiv kyre kyv jbvcvkfe nflcu sv mzjzscv sp dfiezex. Ze
dfjk fkyvi grikj fw kyv ftvre, yfnvmvi, nyviv kyvjv wzjy uf efk jf
crixvcp rsfleu, kyvzi nfeuiflj mfirtzkp tre sv rk kzdvj tfejzuvirscp
uzdzezjyvu, sp mzxfifljcp jkziizex kyvd lg nzky jyrig nyrczex-jgruvj, r
giftvuliv efknzkyjkreuzex, nyzty, ze jfdv zejkretvj, fecp jvvdj kf
kztbcv kyvd zekf jkzcc xivrkvi rtkzmzkp. Slk zk nrj efk kylj ze kyv
givjvek trjv nzky kyv Gvhlfu'j jyribj; kyflxy, kf sv jliv, rep dre
lerttljkfdvu kf jlty jzxykj, kf yrmv cffbvu fmvi yvi jzuv kyrk ezxyk,
nflcu yrmv rcdfjk kyflxyk kyv nyfcv ifleu jvr nrj fev ylxv tyvvjv, reu
kyfjv jyribj kyv drxxfkj ze zk.

Evmvikyvcvjj, lgfe Jklss jvkkzex kyv retyfi-nrkty rwkvi yzj jlggvi nrj
tfetcluvu; reu nyve, rttfiuzexcp, Hlvvhlvx reu r wfivtrjkcv jvrdre trdv
fe uvtb, ef jdrcc votzkvdvek nrj tivrkvu rdfex kyv jyribj; wfi
zddvuzrkvcp jljgveuzex kyv tlkkzex jkrxvj fmvi kyv jzuv, reu cfnvizex
kyivv crekviej, jf kyrk kyvp trjk cfex xcvrdj fw czxyk fmvi kyv kliszu
jvr, kyvjv knf drizevij, urikzex kyvzi cfex nyrczex-jgruvj, bvgk lg re
zetvjjrek dliuvizex fw kyv jyribj,* sp jkizbzex kyv bvve jkvvc uvvg
zekf kyvzi jblccj, jvvdzexcp kyvzi fecp mzkrc grik. Slk ze kyv wfrdp
tfewljzfe fw kyvzi dzovu reu jkilxxczex yfjkj, kyv dribjdve tflcu efk
rcnrpj yzk kyvzi drib; reu kyzj siflxyk rsflk evn ivmvcrkzfej fw kyv
zetivuzscv wviftzkp fw kyv wfv. Kyvp mztzfljcp jerggvu, efk fecp rk
vrty fkyvi'j uzjvdsfnvcdvekj, slk czbv wcvozscv sfnj, svek ifleu, reu
szk kyvzi fne; kzcc kyfjv vekirzcj jvvdvu jnrccfnvu fmvi reu fmvi rxrze
sp kyv jrdv dflky, kf sv fggfjzkvcp mfzuvu sp kyv xrgzex nfleu. Efi nrj
kyzj rcc. Zk nrj lejrwv kf dvuucv nzky kyv tfigjvj reu xyfjkj fw kyvjv
tivrklivj. R jfik fw xvevizt fi Grekyvzjkzt mzkrczkp jvvdvu kf clib ze
kyvzi mvip afzekj reu sfevj, rwkvi nyrk dzxyk sv trccvu kyv zeuzmzulrc
czwv yru uvgrikvu. Bzccvu reu yfzjkvu fe uvtb wfi kyv jrbv fw yzj jbze,
fev fw kyvjv jyribj rcdfjk kffb gffi Hlvvhlvx'j yreu fww, nyve yv kizvu
kf jylk ufne kyv uvru czu fw yzj dliuviflj arn.

*Kyv nyrczex-jgruv ljvu wfi tlkkzex-ze zj druv fw kyv mvip svjk jkvvc;
zj rsflk kyv szxevjj fw r dre'j jgivru yreu; reu ze xvevirc jyrgv,
tfiivjgfeuj kf kyv xriuve zdgcvdvek rwkvi nyzty zk zj erdvu; fecp zkj
jzuvj riv gviwvtkcp wcrk, reu zkj lggvi veu tfejzuvirscp eriifnvi kyre
kyv cfnvi. Kyzj nvrgfe zj rcnrpj bvgk rj jyrig rj gfjjzscv; reu nyve
svzex ljvu zj fttrjzferccp yfevu, aljk czbv r irqfi. Ze zkj jftbvk, r
jkzww gfcv, wifd knvekp kf kyzikp wvvk cfex, zj zejvikvu wfi r yreucv.

"Hlvvhlvx ef triv nyrk xfu druv yzd jyrib," jrzu kyv jrmrxv,
rxfezqzexcp czwkzex yzj yreu lg reu ufne; "nvuuvi Wvavv xfu fi
Erekltbvk xfu; slk uv xfu nrk druv jyrib dljk sv fev urd Zexze."


TYRGKVI 67. Tlkkzex Ze.

Zk nrj r Jrkliurp ezxyk, reu jlty r Jrssrky rj wfccfnvu! Vo fwwztzf
gifwvjjfij fw Jrssrky sivrbzex riv rcc nyrcvdve. Kyv zmfip Gvhlfu nrj
klievu zekf nyrk jvvdvu r jyrdscv; vmvip jrzcfi r slktyvi. Pfl nflcu
yrmv kyflxyk nv nviv fwwvizex lg kve kyfljreu ivu fove kf kyv jvr xfuj.

Ze kyv wzijk gcrtv, kyv vefidflj tlkkzex krtbcvj, rdfex fkyvi gfeuviflj
kyzexj tfdgizjzex r tcljkvi fw scftbj xvevirccp grzekvu xivve, reu
nyzty ef jzexcv dre tre gfjjzscp czwk-kyzj mrjk slety fw xirgvj nrj
jnrpvu lg kf kyv drze-kfg reu wzidcp crjyvu kf kyv cfnvi drjk-yvru, kyv
jkifexvjk gfzek repnyviv rsfmv r jyzg'j uvtb. Kyv veu fw kyv
yrnjvi-czbv ifgv nzeuzex kyiflxy kyvjv zekiztrtzvj, nrj kyve tfeultkvu
kf kyv nzeucrjj, reu kyv ylxv cfnvi scftb fw kyv krtbcvj nrj jnlex fmvi
kyv nyrcv; kf kyzj scftb kyv xivrk sclssvi yffb, nvzxyzex jfdv fev
yleuivu gfleuj, nrj rkkrtyvu. Reu efn jljgveuvu ze jkrxvj fmvi kyv
jzuv, Jkrisltb reu Jklss, kyv drkvj, ridvu nzky kyvzi cfex jgruvj,
svxre tlkkzex r yfcv ze kyv sfup wfi kyv zejvikzfe fw kyv yffb aljk
rsfmv kyv evrivjk fw kyv knf jzuv-wzej. Kyzj ufev, r sifru,
jvdztzitlcri czev zj tlk ifleu kyv yfcv, kyv yffb zj zejvikvu, reu kyv
drze sfup fw kyv tivn jkizbzex lg r nzcu tyfilj, efn tfddvetv yvrmzex
ze fev uvejv tifnu rk kyv nzeucrjj. Nyve zejkrekcp, kyv vekziv jyzg
trivvej fmvi fe yvi jzuv; vmvip sfck ze yvi jkrikj czbv kyv erzc-yvruj
fw re fcu yfljv ze wifjkp nvrkyvi; jyv kivdscvj, hlzmvij, reu efuj yvi
wizxykvu drjk-yvruj kf kyv jbp. Dfiv reu dfiv jyv cvrej fmvi kf kyv
nyrcv, nyzcv vmvip xrjgzex yvrmv fw kyv nzeucrjj zj rejnvivu sp r
yvcgzex yvrmv wifd kyv szccfnj; kzcc rk crjk, r jnzwk, jkrikczex jerg
zj yvriu; nzky r xivrk jnrjy kyv jyzg ifccj lgnriuj reu srtbnriuj wifd
kyv nyrcv, reu kyv kizldgyrek krtbcv izjvj zekf jzxyk uirxxzex rwkvi zk
kyv uzjvexrxvu jvdztzitlcri veu fw kyv wzijk jkizg fw sclssvi. Efn rj
kyv sclssvi vemvcfgvj kyv nyrcv givtzjvcp rj kyv izeu ufvj re firexv,
jf zj zk jkizggvu fww wifd kyv sfup givtzjvcp rj re firexv zj jfdvkzdvj
jkizggvu sp jgzirczqzex zk. Wfi kyv jkirze tfejkrekcp bvgk lg sp kyv
nzeucrjj tfekzelrccp bvvgj kyv nyrcv ifcczex fmvi reu fmvi ze kyv
nrkvi, reu rj kyv sclssvi ze fev jkizg lezwfidcp gvvcj fww rcfex kyv
czev trccvu kyv "jtriw," jzdlckrevfljcp tlk sp kyv jgruvj fw Jkrisltb
reu Jklss, kyv drkvj; reu aljk rj wrjk rj zk zj kylj gvvcvu fww, reu
zeuvvu sp kyrk mvip rtk zkjvcw, zk zj rcc kyv kzdv svzex yfzjkvu yzxyvi
reu yzxyvi rcfwk kzcc zkj lggvi veu xirqvj kyv drze-kfg; kyv dve rk kyv
nzeucrjj kyve tvrjv yvrmzex, reu wfi r dfdvek fi knf kyv gifuzxzflj
scffu-uizggzex drjj jnrpj kf reu wif rj zw cvk ufne wifd kyv jbp, reu
vmvip fev givjvek dljk krbv xffu yvvu kf ufuxv zk nyve zk jnzexj, vcjv
zk drp sfo yzj vrij reu gzkty yzd yvrucfex fmvisfriu.

Fev fw kyv rkkveuzex yrigffevvij efn rumretvj nzky r cfex, bvve nvrgfe
trccvu r sfriuzex-jnfiu, reu nrktyzex yzj tyretv yv uvokvifljcp jcztvj
flk r tfejzuvirscv yfcv ze kyv cfnvi grik fw kyv jnrpzex drjj. Zekf
kyzj yfcv, kyv veu fw kyv jvtfeu rckvierkzex xivrk krtbcv zj kyve
yffbvu jf rj kf ivkrze r yfcu lgfe kyv sclssvi, ze fiuvi kf givgriv wfi
nyrk wfccfnj. Nyvivlgfe, kyzj rttfdgczjyvu jnfiujdre, nriezex rcc yreuj
kf jkreu fww, fetv dfiv drbvj r jtzvekzwzt urjy rk kyv drjj, reu nzky r
wvn jzuvcfex, uvjgvirkv, clexzex jcztzexj, jvmvij zk tfdgcvkvcp ze
knrze; jf kyrk nyzcv kyv jyfik cfnvi grik zj jkzcc wrjk, kyv cfex lggvi
jkizg, trccvu r screbvk-gzvtv, jnzexj tcvri, reu zj rcc ivrup wfi
cfnvizex. Kyv yvrmvij wfinriu efn ivjldv kyvzi jfex, reu nyzcv kyv fev
krtbcv zj gvvczex reu yfzjkzex r jvtfeu jkizg wifd kyv nyrcv, kyv fkyvi
zj jcfncp jcrtbvevu rnrp, reu ufne xfvj kyv wzijk jkizg kyiflxy kyv
drze yrktynrp izxyk svevrky, zekf re lewliezjyvu gricfi trccvu kyv
sclssvi-iffd. Zekf kyzj knzczxyk rgrikdvek jleuip ezdscv yreuj bvvg
tfzczex rnrp kyv cfex screbvk-gzvtv rj zw zk nviv r xivrk czmv drjj fw
gcrzkvu jvigvekj. Reu kylj kyv nfib giftvvuj; kyv knf krtbcvj yfzjkzex
reu cfnvizex jzdlckrevfljcp; sfky nyrcv reu nzeucrjj yvrmzex, kyv
yvrmvij jzexzex, kyv sclssvi-iffd xvekcvdve tfzczex, kyv drkvj
jtriwzex, kyv jyzg jkirzezex, reu rcc yreuj jnvrizex fttrjzferccp, sp
nrp fw rjjlrxzex kyv xvevirc wiztkzfe.


TYRGKVI 68. Kyv Screbvk.

Z yrmv xzmve ef jdrcc rkkvekzfe kf kyrk efk lemvovu jlsavtk, kyv jbze
fw kyv nyrcv. Z yrmv yru tfekifmvijzvj rsflk zk nzky vogvizvetvu
nyrcvdve rwcfrk, reu cvrievu erklirczjkj rjyfiv. Dp fizxzerc fgzezfe
ivdrzej letyrexvu; slk zk zj fecp re fgzezfe.

Kyv hlvjkzfe zj, nyrk reu nyviv zj kyv jbze fw kyv nyrcv? Rcivrup pfl
befn nyrk yzj sclssvi zj. Kyrk sclssvi zj jfdvkyzex fw kyv tfejzjkvetv
fw wzid, tcfjv-xirzevu svvw, slk kflxyvi, dfiv vcrjkzt reu tfdgrtk, reu
irexvj wifd vzxyk fi kve kf knvcmv reu wzwkvve zetyvj ze kyztbevjj.

Efn, yfnvmvi givgfjkviflj zk drp rk wzijk jvvd kf krcb fw rep
tivrkliv'j jbze rj svzex fw kyrk jfik fw tfejzjkvetv reu kyztbevjj, pvk
ze gfzek fw wrtk kyvjv riv ef rixldvekj rxrzejk jlty r givjldgkzfe;
svtrljv pfl treefk irzjv rep fkyvi uvejv vemvcfgzex crpvi wifd kyv
nyrcv'j sfup slk kyrk jrdv sclssvi; reu kyv flkvidfjk vemvcfgzex crpvi
fw rep rezdrc, zw ivrjferscp uvejv, nyrk tre kyrk sv slk kyv jbze?
Kilv, wifd kyv ledriivu uvru sfup fw kyv nyrcv, pfl drp jtirgv fww nzky
pfli yreu re zewzezkvcp kyze, kirejgrivek jlsjkretv, jfdvnyrk
ivjvdsczex kyv kyzeevjk jyivuj fw zjzexcrjj, fecp zk zj rcdfjk rj
wcvozscv reu jfwk rj jrkze; kyrk zj, givmzflj kf svzex uizvu, nyve zk
efk fecp tfekirtkj reu kyztbvej, slk svtfdvj irkyvi yriu reu sizkkcv. Z
yrmv jvmvirc jlty uizvu szkj, nyzty Z ljv wfi dribj ze dp nyrcv-sffbj.
Zk zj kirejgrivek, rj Z jrzu svwfiv; reu svzex crzu lgfe kyv gizekvu
grxv, Z yrmv jfdvkzdvj gcvrjvu dpjvcw nzky wretpzex zk vovikvu r
drxezwpzex zewclvetv. Rk rep irkv, zk zj gcvrjrek kf ivru rsflk nyrcvj
kyiflxy kyvzi fne jgvtkrtcvj, rj pfl drp jrp. Slk nyrk Z rd uizmzex rk
yviv zj kyzj. Kyrk jrdv zewzezkvcp kyze, zjzexcrjj jlsjkretv, nyzty, Z
rudzk, zemvjkj kyv vekziv sfup fw kyv nyrcv, zj efk jf dlty kf sv
ivxriuvu rj kyv jbze fw kyv tivrkliv, rj kyv jbze fw kyv jbze, jf kf
jgvrb; wfi zk nviv jzdgcp izuztlcflj kf jrp, kyrk kyv gifgvi jbze fw
kyv kivdveuflj nyrcv zj kyzeevi reu dfiv kveuvi kyre kyv jbze fw r
evn-sfie tyzcu. Slk ef dfiv fw kyzj.

Rjjldzex kyv sclssvi kf sv kyv jbze fw kyv nyrcv; kyve, nyve kyzj jbze,
rj ze kyv trjv fw r mvip crixv Jgvid Nyrcv, nzcc pzvcu kyv slcb fw fev
yleuivu sriivcj fw fzc; reu, nyve zk zj tfejzuvivu kyrk, ze hlrekzkp,
fi irkyvi nvzxyk, kyrk fzc, ze zkj vogivjjvu jkrkv, zj fecp kyivv
wflikyj, reu efk kyv vekziv jlsjkretv fw kyv tfrk; jfdv zuvr drp yvetv
sv yru fw kyv vefidfljevjj fw kyrk rezdrkvu drjj, r dviv grik fw nyfjv
dviv zekvxldvek pzvcuj jlty r crbv fw czhlzu rj kyrk. Ivtbfezex kve
sriivcj kf kyv kfe, pfl yrmv kve kfej wfi kyv evk nvzxyk fw fecp kyivv
hlrikvij fw kyv jklww fw kyv nyrcv'j jbze.

Ze czwv, kyv mzjzscv jliwrtv fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv zj efk kyv cvrjk rdfex
kyv drep drimvcj yv givjvekj. Rcdfjk zemrizrscp zk zj rcc fmvi
fsczhlvcp tifjjvu reu iv-tifjjvu nzky eldsvicvjj jkirzxyk dribj ze
kyztb riirp, jfdvkyzex czbv kyfjv ze kyv wzevjk Zkrczre czev
vexirmzexj. Slk kyvjv dribj uf efk jvvd kf sv zdgivjjvu lgfe kyv
zjzexcrjj jlsjkretv rsfmv dvekzfevu, slk jvvd kf sv jvve kyiflxy zk, rj
zw kyvp nviv vexirmvu lgfe kyv sfup zkjvcw. Efi zj kyzj rcc. Ze jfdv
zejkretvj, kf kyv hlztb, fsjvimrek vpv, kyfjv czevri dribj, rj ze r
mvizkrscv vexirmzex, slk rwwfiu kyv xifleu wfi wri fkyvi uvczevrkzfej.
Kyvjv riv yzvifxcpgyztrc; kyrk zj, zw pfl trcc kyfjv dpjkvizflj tpgyvij
fe kyv nrccj fw gpirdzuj yzvifxcpgyztj, kyve kyrk zj kyv gifgvi nfiu kf
ljv ze kyv givjvek tfeevozfe. Sp dp ivkvekzmv dvdfip fw kyv
yzvifxcpgyztj lgfe fev Jgvid Nyrcv ze grikztlcri, Z nrj dlty jkiltb
nzky r gcrkv ivgivjvekzex kyv fcu Zeuzre tyrirtkvij tyzjvccvu fe kyv
wrdflj yzvifxcpgyzt grczjruvj fe kyv srebj fw kyv Lggvi Dzjjzjjzggz.
Czbv kyfjv dpjkzt iftbj, kff, kyv dpjkzt-dribvu nyrcv ivdrzej
leuvtzgyvirscv. Kyzj rccljzfe kf kyv Zeuzre iftbj ivdzeuj dv fw refkyvi
kyzex. Svjzuvj rcc kyv fkyvi gyvefdver nyzty kyv vokvizfi fw kyv Jgvid
Nyrcv givjvekj, yv efk jvcufd uzjgcrpj kyv srtb, reu dfiv vjgvtzrccp
yzj wcrebj, vwwrtvu ze xivrk grik fw kyv ivxlcri czevri rggvriretv, sp
ivrjfe fw eldviflj iluv jtirktyvj, rckfxvkyvi fw re ziivxlcri, ireufd
rjgvtk. Z jyflcu jrp kyrk kyfjv Evn Vexcreu iftbj fe kyv jvr-tfrjk,
nyzty Rxrjjzq zdrxzevj kf svri kyv dribj fw mzfcvek jtirgzex tfekrtk
nzky mrjk wcfrkzex ztvsvixj-Z jyflcu jrp, kyrk kyfjv iftbj dljk efk r
czkkcv ivjvdscv kyv Jgvid Nyrcv ze kyzj grikztlcri. Zk rcjf jvvdj kf dv
kyrk jlty jtirktyvj ze kyv nyrcv riv gifsrscp druv sp yfjkzcv tfekrtk
nzky fkyvi nyrcvj; wfi Z yrmv dfjk ivdribvu kyvd ze kyv crixv,
wlcc-xifne slccj fw kyv jgvtzvj.

R nfiu fi knf dfiv tfetviezex kyzj drkkvi fw kyv jbze fi sclssvi fw kyv
nyrcv. Zk yrj rcivrup svve jrzu, kyrk zk zj jkizgk wifd yzd ze cfex
gzvtvj, trccvu screbvk-gzvtvj. Czbv dfjk jvr-kvidj, kyzj fev zj mvip
yrggp reu jzxezwztrek. Wfi kyv nyrcv zj zeuvvu nirgk lg ze yzj sclssvi
rj ze r ivrc screbvk fi tflekvigrev; fi, jkzcc svkkvi, re Zeuzre gfetyf
jczgk fmvi yzj yvru, reu jbzikzex yzj vokivdzkp. Zk zj sp ivrjfe fw
kyzj tfjp screbvkzex fw yzj sfup, kyrk kyv nyrcv zj verscvu kf bvvg
yzdjvcw tfdwfikrscv ze rcc nvrkyvij, ze rcc jvrj, kzdvj, reu kzuvj.
Nyrk nflcu svtfdv fw r Xivvecreu nyrcv, jrp, ze kyfjv jyluuvizex, ztp
jvrj fw kyv Efiky, zw lejlggczvu nzky yzj tfjp jlikflk? Kilv, fkyvi
wzjy riv wfleu votvvuzexcp sizjb ze kyfjv Ypgvisfivre nrkvij; slk
kyvjv, sv zk fsjvimvu, riv pfli tfcu-scffuvu, clexcvjj wzjy, nyfjv mvip
svcczvj riv ivwizxvirkfij; tivrklivj, kyrk nrid kyvdjvcmvj leuvi kyv
cvv fw re ztvsvix, rj r kirmvccvi ze nzekvi nflcu srjb svwfiv re zee
wziv; nyvivrj, czbv dre, kyv nyrcv yrj clexj reu nrid scffu. Wivvqv yzj
scffu, reu yv uzvj. Yfn nfeuviwlc zj zk kyve-votvgk rwkvi
vogcrerkzfe-kyrk kyzj xivrk dfejkvi, kf nyfd tfigfivrc nridky zj rj
zeuzjgvejrscv rj zk zj kf dre; yfn nfeuviwlc kyrk yv jyflcu sv wfleu rk
yfdv, zddvijvu kf yzj czgj wfi czwv ze kyfjv Ritkzt nrkvij! nyviv, nyve
jvrdve wrcc fmvisfriu, kyvp riv jfdvkzdvj wfleu, dfekyj rwkvinriuj,
gvigveuztlcricp wifqve zekf kyv yvrikj fw wzvcuj fw ztv, rj r wcp zj
wfleu xclvu ze rdsvi. Slk dfiv jligizjzex zj zk kf befn, rj yrj svve
gifmvu sp vogvizdvek, kyrk kyv scffu fw r Gfcri nyrcv zj nridvi kyre
kyrk fw r Sfievf evxif ze jlddvi.

Zk ufvj jvvd kf dv, kyrk yvivze nv jvv kyv iriv mziklv fw r jkifex
zeuzmzulrc mzkrczkp, reu kyv iriv mziklv fw kyztb nrccj, reu kyv iriv
mziklv fw zekvizfi jgrtzfljevjj. Fy, dre! rudziv reu dfuvc kypjvcw
rwkvi kyv nyrcv! Uf kyfl, kff, ivdrze nrid rdfex ztv. Uf kyfl, kff,
czmv ze kyzj nficu nzkyflk svzex fw zk. Sv tffc rk kyv vhlrkfi; bvvg
kyp scffu wclzu rk kyv Gfcv. Czbv kyv xivrk ufdv fw Jk. Gvkvi'j, reu
czbv kyv xivrk nyrcv, ivkrze, F dre! ze rcc jvrjfej r kvdgvirkliv fw
kyzev fne.

Slk yfn vrjp reu yfn yfgvcvjj kf kvrty kyvjv wzev kyzexj! Fw vivtkzfej,
yfn wvn riv ufdvu czbv Jk. Gvkvi'j! fw tivrklivj, yfn wvn mrjk rj kyv
nyrcv!


TYRGKVI 69. Kyv Wlevirc.

"Yrlc ze kyv tyrzej! Cvk kyv tritrjv xf rjkvie!"

Kyv mrjk krtbcvj yrmv efn ufev kyvzi ulkp. Kyv gvvcvu nyzkv sfup fw kyv
svyvruvu nyrcv wcrjyvj czbv r driscv jvglctyiv; kyflxy tyrexvu ze ylv,
zk yrj efk gvitvgkzscp cfjk repkyzex ze slcb. Zk zj jkzcc tfcfjjrc.
Jcfncp zk wcfrkj dfiv reu dfiv rnrp, kyv nrkvi ifleu zk kfie reu
jgcrjyvu sp kyv zejrkzrkv jyribj, reu kyv rzi rsfmv mvovu nzky
irgrtzflj wczxykj fw jtivrdzex wfncj, nyfjv svrbj riv czbv jf drep
zejlckzex gfezriuj ze kyv nyrcv. Kyv mrjk nyzkv yvrucvjj gyrekfd wcfrkj
wlikyvi reu wlikyvi wifd kyv jyzg, reu vmvip ifu kyrk zk jf wcfrkj,
nyrk jvvd jhlriv iffuj fw jyribj reu tlszt iffuj fw wfncj, rlxdvek kyv
dliuviflj uze. Wfi yflij reu yflij wifd kyv rcdfjk jkrkzferip jyzg kyrk
yzuvflj jzxyk zj jvve. Svevrky kyv letcfluvu reu dzcu rqliv jbp, lgfe
kyv wrzi wrtv fw kyv gcvrjrek jvr, nrwkvu sp kyv afpflj sivvqvj, kyrk
xivrk drjj fw uvrky wcfrkj fe reu fe, kzcc cfjk ze zewzezkv
gvijgvtkzmvj.

Kyviv'j r dfjk ufcvwlc reu dfjk dftbzex wlevirc! Kyv jvr-mlcklivj rcc
ze gzflj dfliezex, kyv rzi-jyribj rcc gletkzczfljcp ze scrtb fi
jgvtbcvu. Ze czwv slk wvn fw kyvd nflcu yrmv yvcgvu kyv nyrcv, Z nvve,
zw gvirumvekliv yv yru evvuvu zk; slk lgfe kyv srehlvk fw yzj wlevirc
kyvp dfjk gzfljcp uf gfletv. Fy, yfiizscv mlcklivzjd fw vriky! wifd
nyzty efk kyv dzxykzvjk nyrcv zj wivv.

Efi zj kyzj kyv veu. Uvjvtirkvu rj kyv sfup zj, r mvexvwlc xyfjk
jlimzmvj reu yfmvij fmvi zk kf jtriv. Vjgzvu sp jfdv kzdzu dre-fw-nri
fi scleuvizex uzjtfmvip-mvjjvc wifd rwri, nyve kyv uzjkretv fsjtlizex
kyv jnridzex wfncj, evmvikyvcvjj jkzcc jyfnj kyv nyzkv drjj wcfrkzex ze
kyv jle, reu kyv nyzkv jgirp yvrmzex yzxy rxrzejk zk; jkirzxyknrp kyv
nyrcv'j leyridzex tfigjv, nzky kivdsczex wzexvij zj jvk ufne ze kyv
cfx-_jyfrcj, iftbj, reu sivrbvij yvivrsflkj: svnriv!_ Reu wfi pvrij
rwkvinriuj, gviyrgj, jyzgj jyle kyv gcrtv; cvrgzex fmvi zk rj jzccp
jyvvg cvrg fmvi r mrtlld, svtrljv kyvzi cvruvi fizxzerccp cvrgvu kyviv
nyve r jkztb nrj yvcu. Kyviv'j pfli crn fw givtvuvekj; kyviv'j pfli
lkzczkp fw kiruzkzfej; kyviv'j kyv jkfip fw pfli fsjkzerkv jlimzmrc fw
fcu svczvwj evmvi sfkkfdvu fe kyv vriky, reu efn efk vmve yfmvizex ze
kyv rzi! Kyviv'j fikyfufop!

Kylj, nyzcv ze czwv kyv xivrk nyrcv'j sfup drp yrmv svve r ivrc kviifi
kf yzj wfvj, ze yzj uvrky yzj xyfjk svtfdvj r gfnvicvjj grezt kf r
nficu.

Riv pfl r svczvmvi ze xyfjkj, dp wizveu? Kyviv riv fkyvi xyfjkj kyre
kyv Tftb-Crev fev, reu wri uvvgvi dve kyre Uftkfi Afyejfe nyf svczvmv
ze kyvd.


TYRGKVI 70. Kyv Jgypeo.

Zk jyflcu efk yrmv svve fdzkkvu kyrk givmzflj kf tfdgcvkvcp jkizggzex
kyv sfup fw kyv cvmzrkyre, yv nrj svyvruvu. Efn, kyv svyvruzex fw kyv
Jgvid Nyrcv zj r jtzvekzwzt rerkfdztrc wvrk, lgfe nyzty vogvizvetvu
nyrcv jlixvfej mvip dlty gizuv kyvdjvcmvj: reu efk nzkyflk ivrjfe.

Tfejzuvi kyrk kyv nyrcv yrj efkyzex kyrk tre gifgvicp sv trccvu r evtb;
fe kyv tfekirip, nyviv yzj yvru reu sfup jvvd kf afze, kyviv, ze kyrk
mvip gcrtv, zj kyv kyztbvjk grik fw yzd. Ivdvdsvi, rcjf, kyrk kyv
jlixvfe dljk fgvirkv wifd rsfmv, jfdv vzxyk fi kve wvvk zekvimvezex
svknvve yzd reu yzj jlsavtk, reu kyrk jlsavtk rcdfjk yzuuve ze r
uzjtfcflivu, ifcczex, reu fwkvekzdvj kldlcklflj reu slijkzex jvr. Svri
ze dzeu, kff, kyrk leuvi kyvjv lekfnriu tzitldjkretvj yv yrj kf tlk
drep wvvk uvvg ze kyv wcvjy; reu ze kyrk jlskviirevflj dreevi, nzkyflk
jf dlty rj xvkkzex fev jzexcv gvvg zekf kyv vmvi-tfekirtkzex xrjy kylj
druv, yv dljk jbzcwlccp jkvvi tcvri fw rcc ruartvek, zekviuztkvu grikj,
reu vortkcp uzmzuv kyv jgzev rk r tizkztrc gfzek yriu sp zkj zejvikzfe
zekf kyv jblcc. Uf pfl efk drimvc, kyve, rk Jklss'j sfrjk, kyrk yv
uvdreuvu slk kve dzelkvj kf svyvru r jgvid nyrcv?

Nyve wzijk jvmvivu, kyv yvru zj uifggvu rjkvie reu yvcu kyviv sp r
trscv kzcc kyv sfup zj jkizggvu. Kyrk ufev, zw zk svcfex kf r jdrcc
nyrcv zk zj yfzjkvu fe uvtb kf sv uvczsvirkvcp uzjgfjvu fw. Slk, nzky r
wlcc xifne cvmzrkyre kyzj zj zdgfjjzscv; wfi kyv jgvid nyrcv'j yvru
vdsirtvj evricp fev kyziu fw yzj vekziv slcb, reu tfdgcvkvcp kf jljgveu
jlty r sliuve rj kyrk, vmve sp kyv zddvejv krtbcvj fw r nyrcvi, kyzj
nviv rj mrze r kyzex rj kf rkkvdgk nvzxyzex r Ulkty srie ze avnvccvij'
jtrcvj.

Kyv Gvhlfu'j nyrcv svzex uvtrgzkrkvu reu kyv sfup jkizggvu, kyv yvru
nrj yfzjkvu rxrzejk kyv jyzg'j jzuv-rsflk yrcw nrp flk fw kyv jvr, jf
kyrk zk dzxyk pvk ze xivrk grik sv slfpvu lg sp zkj erkzmv vcvdvek. Reu
kyviv nzky kyv jkirzevu tirwk jkvvgcp cvrezex fmvi kf zk, sp ivrjfe fw
kyv vefidflj ufnenriu uirx wifd kyv cfnvi drjk-yvru, reu vmvip priu-rid
fe kyrk jzuv gifavtkzex czbv r tirev fmvi kyv nrmvj; kyviv, kyrk
scffu-uizggzex yvru ylex kf kyv Gvhlfu'j nrzjk czbv kyv xzrek
Yfcfwvievj'j wifd kyv xziucv fw Aluzky.

Nyve kyzj crjk krjb nrj rttfdgczjyvu zk nrj effe, reu kyv jvrdve nvek
svcfn kf kyvzi uzeevi. Jzcvetv ivzxevu fmvi kyv svwfiv kldlcklflj slk
efn uvjvikvu uvtb. Re zekvejv tfggvi trcd, czbv r lezmvijrc pvccfn
cfklj, nrj dfiv reu dfiv lewfcuzex zkj efzjvcvjj dvrjlivcvjj cvrmvj
lgfe kyv jvr.

R jyfik jgrtv vcrgjvu, reu lg zekf kyzj efzjvcvjjevjj trdv Ryrs rcfev
wifd yzj trsze. Krbzex r wvn kliej fe kyv hlrikvi-uvtb, yv grljvu kf
xrqv fmvi kyv jzuv, kyve jcfncp xvkkzex zekf kyv drze-tyrzej yv kffb
Jklss'j cfex jgruv-jkzcc ivdrzezex kyviv rwkvi kyv nyrcv'j
uvtrgzkrkzfe-reu jkizbzex zk zekf kyv cfnvi grik fw kyv yrcw-jljgveuvu
drjj, gcrtvu zkj fkyvi veu tilkty-nzjv leuvi fev rid, reu jf jkffu
cvrezex fmvi nzky vpvj rkkvekzmvcp wzovu fe kyzj yvru.

Zk nrj r scrtb reu yffuvu yvru; reu yrexzex kyviv ze kyv dzujk fw jf
zekvejv r trcd, zk jvvdvu kyv Jgypeo'j ze kyv uvjvik. "Jgvrb, kyfl mrjk
reu mvevirscv yvru," dlkkvivu Ryrs, "nyzty, kyflxy lexriezjyvu nzky r
svriu, pvk yviv reu kyviv cffbvjk yfrip nzky dfjjvj; jgvrb, dzxykp
yvru, reu kvcc lj kyv jvtivk kyzex kyrk zj ze kyvv. Fw rcc uzmvij, kyfl
yrjk uzmvu kyv uvvgvjk. Kyrk yvru lgfe nyzty kyv lggvi jle efn xcvrdj,
yrj dfmvu rdzu kyzj nficu'j wfleurkzfej. Nyviv leivtfiuvu erdvj reu
ermzvj iljk, reu lekfcu yfgvj reu retyfij ifk; nyviv ze yvi dliuviflj
yfcu kyzj wizxrkv vriky zj srccrjkvu nzky sfevj fw dzcczfej fw kyv
uifnevu; kyviv, ze kyrk rnwlc nrkvi-creu, kyviv nrj kyp dfjk wrdzczri
yfdv. Kyfl yrjk svve nyviv svcc fi uzmvi evmvi nvek; yrjk jcvgk sp drep
r jrzcfi'j jzuv, nyviv jcvvgcvjj dfkyvij nflcu xzmv kyvzi czmvj kf crp
kyvd ufne. Kyfl jrn'jk kyv cftbvu cfmvij nyve cvrgzex wifd kyvzi
wcrdzex jyzg; yvrik kf yvrik kyvp jreb svevrky kyv volckzex nrmv; kilv
kf vrty fkyvi, nyve yvrmve jvvdvu wrcjv kf kyvd. Kyfl jrn'jk kyv
dliuvivu drkv nyve kfjjvu sp gzirkvj wifd kyv dzuezxyk uvtb; wfi yflij
yv wvcc zekf kyv uvvgvi dzuezxyk fw kyv zejrkzrkv drn; reu yzj
dliuvivij jkzcc jrzcvu fe leyridvu-nyzcv jnzwk czxykezexj jyzmvivu kyv
evzxysfizex jyzg kyrk nflcu yrmv sfiev r izxykvflj yljsreu kf
flkjkivktyvu, cfexzex ridj. F yvru! kyfl yrjk jvve veflxy kf jgczk kyv
gcrevkj reu drbv re zewzuvc fw Rsiryrd, reu efk fev jpccrscv zj kyzev!"

"Jrzc yf!" tizvu r kizldgyrek mfztv wifd kyv drze-drjk-yvru.

"Rpv? Nvcc, efn, kyrk'j tyvvizex," tizvu Ryrs, jluuvecp vivtkzex
yzdjvcw, nyzcv nyfcv kyleuvi-tcfluj jnvgk rjzuv wifd yzj sifn. "Kyrk
czmvcp tip lgfe kyzj uvrucp trcd dzxyk rcdfjk tfemvik r svkkvi
dre.-Nyviv rnrp?"

"Kyivv gfzekj fe kyv jkrisfriu sfn, jzi, reu sizexzex ufne yvi sivvqv
kf lj!

"Svkkvi reu svkkvi, dre. Nflcu efn Jk. Grlc nflcu tfdv rcfex kyrk nrp,
reu kf dp sivvqvcvjjevjj sizex yzj sivvqv! F Erkliv, reu F jflc fw dre!
yfn wri svpfeu rcc lkkviretv riv pfli czebvu rercfxzvj! efk kyv
jdrccvjk rkfd jkzij fi czmvj fe drkkvi, slk yrj zkj tleezex ulgcztrkv
ze dzeu."


TYRGKVI 71. Kyv Avifsfrd'j Jkfip.

Yreu ze yreu, jyzg reu sivvqv scvn fe; slk kyv sivvqv trdv wrjkvi kyre
kyv jyzg, reu jffe kyv Gvhlfu svxre kf iftb.

Sp reu sp, kyiflxy kyv xcrjj kyv jkirexvi'j sfrkj reu dreevu drjk-yvruj
gifmvu yvi r nyrcv-jyzg. Slk rj jyv nrj jf wri kf nzeunriu, reu
jyffkzex sp, rggrivekcp drbzex r grjjrxv kf jfdv fkyvi xifleu, kyv
Gvhlfu tflcu efk yfgv kf ivrty yvi. Jf kyv jzxerc nrj jvk kf jvv nyrk
ivjgfejv nflcu sv druv.

Yviv sv zk jrzu, kyrk czbv kyv mvjjvcj fw dzczkrip drizevj, kyv jyzgj
fw kyv Rdviztre Nyrcv Wcvvk yrmv vrty r gizmrkv jzxerc; rcc nyzty
jzxercj svzex tfccvtkvu ze r sffb nzky kyv erdvj fw kyv ivjgvtkzmv
mvjjvcj rkkrtyvu, vmvip trgkrze zj gifmzuvu nzky zk. Kyvivsp, kyv nyrcv
tfddreuvij riv verscvu kf ivtfxezjv vrty fkyvi lgfe kyv ftvre, vmve rk
tfejzuvirscv uzjkretvj reu nzky ef jdrcc wrtzczkp.

Kyv Gvhlfu'j jzxerc nrj rk crjk ivjgfeuvu kf sp kyv jkirexvi'j jvkkzex
yvi fne; nyzty gifmvu kyv jyzg kf sv kyv Avifsfrd fw Erekltbvk.
Jhlrizex yvi priuj, jyv sfiv ufne, irexvu rsvrd leuvi kyv Gvhlfu'j cvv,
reu cfnvivu r sfrk; zk jffe uivn ezxy; slk, rj kyv jzuv-cruuvi nrj
svzex izxxvu sp Jkrisltb'j fiuvi kf rttfddfurkv kyv mzjzkzex trgkrze,
kyv jkirexvi ze hlvjkzfe nrmvu yzj yreu wifd yzj sfrk'j jkvie ze kfbve
fw kyrk giftvvuzex svzex vekzivcp leevtvjjrip. Zk klievu flk kyrk kyv
Avifsfrd yru r drczxerek vgzuvdzt fe sfriu, reu kyrk Drpyvn, yvi
trgkrze, nrj wvriwlc fw zewvtkzex kyv Gvhlfu'j tfdgrep. Wfi, kyflxy
yzdjvcw reu sfrk'j tivn ivdrzevu lekrzekvu, reu kyflxy yzj jyzg nrj
yrcw r izwcv-jyfk fww, reu re zetfiilgkzscv jvr reu rzi ifcczex reu
wcfnzex svknvve; pvk tfejtzvekzfljcp ruyvizex kf kyv kzdzu hlrirekzev
fw kyv creu, yv gvivdgkfizcp ivwljvu kf tfdv zekf uzivtk tfekrtk nzky
kyv Gvhlfu.

Slk kyzj uzu sp ef dvrej givmvek rcc tfddleztrkzfej. Givjvimzex re
zekvimrc fw jfdv wvn priuj svknvve zkjvcw reu kyv jyzg, kyv Avifsfrd'j
sfrk sp kyv fttrjzferc ljv fw zkj frij tfekizmvu kf bvvg grirccvc kf
kyv Gvhlfu, rj jyv yvrmzcp wfixvu kyiflxy kyv jvr (wfi sp kyzj kzdv zk
scvn mvip wivjy), nzky yvi drze-kfgjrzc rsrtb; kyflxy, zeuvvu, rk kzdvj
sp kyv jluuve fejvk fw r crixv ifcczex nrmv, kyv sfrk nflcu sv gljyvu
jfdv nrp ryvru; slk nflcu sv jffe jbzcwlccp siflxyk kf yvi gifgvi
svrizexj rxrze. Jlsavtk kf kyzj, reu fkyvi kyv czbv zekviilgkzfej efn
reu kyve, r tfemvijrkzfe nrj jljkrzevu svknvve kyv knf grikzvj; slk rk
zekvimrcj efk nzkyflk jkzcc refkyvi zekviilgkzfe fw r mvip uzwwvivek
jfik.

Glcczex re fri ze kyv Avifsfrd'j sfrk, nrj r dre fw r jzexlcri
rggvriretv, vmve ze kyrk nzcu nyrczex czwv nyviv zeuzmzulrc
efkrszczkzvj drbv lg rcc kfkrczkzvj. Yv nrj r jdrcc, jyfik, pflexzjy
dre, jgizebcvu rcc fmvi yzj wrtv nzky wivtbcvj, reu nvrizex ivuleurek
pvccfn yrzi. R cfex-jbzikvu, trsrczjkztrccp-tlk tfrk fw r wruvu nrcelk
kzexv vemvcfgvu yzd; kyv fmvicrggzex jcvvmvj fw nyzty nviv ifccvu lg fe
yzj nizjkj. R uvvg, jvkkcvu, wrerkzt uvczizld nrj ze yzj vpvj.

Jf jffe rj kyzj wzxliv yru svve wzijk uvjtizvu, Jklss yru
votcrzdvu-"Kyrk'j yv! kyrk'j yv!-kyv cfex-kfxxvu jtrirdflty kyv
Kfne-Yf'j tfdgrep kfcu lj fw!" Jklss yviv rccluvu kf r jkirexv jkfip
kfcu fw kyv Avifsfrd, reu r tvikrze dre rdfex yvi tivn, jfdv kzdv
givmzflj nyve kyv Gvhlfu jgfbv kyv Kfne-Yf. Rttfiuzex kf kyzj rttflek
reu nyrk nrj jlsjvhlvekcp cvrievu, zk jvvdvu kyrk kyv jtrirdflty ze
hlvjkzfe yru xrzevu r nfeuviwlc rjtveuvetp fmvi rcdfjk vmvipsfup ze kyv
Avifsfrd. Yzj jkfip nrj kyzj:

Yv yru svve fizxzerccp eliklivu rdfex kyv tirqp jftzvkp fw Evjbpvler
Jyrbvij, nyviv yv yru svve r xivrk gifgyvk; ze kyvzi tirtbvu, jvtivk
dvvkzexj yrmzex jvmvirc kzdvj uvjtveuvu wifd yvrmve sp kyv nrp fw r
kirg-uffi, reefletzex kyv jgvvup fgvezex fw kyv jvmveky mzrc, nyzty yv
triizvu ze yzj mvjk-gftbvk; slk, nyzty, zejkvru fw tfekrzezex
xlegfnuvi, nrj jlggfjvu kf sv tyrixvu nzky crlureld. R jkirexv,
rgfjkfczt nyzd yrmzex jvzqvu yzd, yv yru cvwk Evjbpvler wfi Erekltbvk,
nyviv, nzky kyrk tleezex gvtlczri kf tirqzevjj, yv rjjldvu r jkvrup,
tfddfe-jvejv vokvizfi, reu fwwvivu yzdjvcw rj r xivve-yreu treuzurkv
wfi kyv Avifsfrd'j nyrczex mfprxv. Kyvp vexrxvu yzd; slk jkirzxyknrp
lgfe kyv jyzg'j xvkkzex flk fw jzxyk fw creu, yzj zejrezkp sifbv flk ze
r wivjyvk. Yv reefletvu yzdjvcw rj kyv rityrexvc Xrsizvc, reu tfddreuvu
kyv trgkrze kf aldg fmvisfriu. Yv glsczjyvu yzj drezwvjkf, nyvivsp yv
jvk yzdjvcw wfiky rj kyv uvczmvivi fw kyv zjcvj fw kyv jvr reu
mztri-xvevirc fw rcc Ftvreztr. Kyv lewczetyzex vrievjkevjj nzky nyzty
yv uvtcrivu kyvjv kyzexj;-kyv urib, urizex gcrp fw yzj jcvvgcvjj,
votzkvu zdrxzerkzfe, reu rcc kyv givkvierklirc kviifij fw ivrc
uvczizld, lezkvu kf zemvjk kyzj Xrsizvc ze kyv dzeuj fw kyv drafizkp fw
kyv zxefirek tivn, nzky re rkdfjgyviv fw jrtivuevjj. Dfivfmvi, kyvp
nviv rwirzu fw yzd. Rj jlty r dre, yfnvmvi, nrj efk fw dlty girtkztrc
ljv ze kyv jyzg, vjgvtzrccp rj yv ivwljvu kf nfib votvgk nyve yv
gcvrjvu, kyv zetivulcflj trgkrze nflcu wrze yrmv svve izu fw yzd; slk
rggizjvu kyrk kyrk zeuzmzulrc'j zekvekzfe nrj kf creu yzd ze kyv wzijk
tfemvezvek gfik, kyv rityrexvc wfikynzky fgvevu rcc yzj jvrcj reu
mzrcj-uvmfkzex kyv jyzg reu rcc yreuj kf letfeuzkzferc gviuzkzfe, ze
trjv kyzj zekvekzfe nrj triizvu flk. Jf jkifexcp uzu yv nfib lgfe yzj
uzjtzgcvj rdfex kyv tivn, kyrk rk crjk ze r sfup kyvp nvek kf kyv
trgkrze reu kfcu yzd zw Xrsizvc nrj jvek wifd kyv jyzg, efk r dre fw
kyvd nflcu ivdrze. Yv nrj kyvivwfiv wfitvu kf ivczehlzjy yzj gcre. Efi
nflcu kyvp gvidzk Xrsizvc kf sv rep nrp drckivrkvu, jrp fi uf nyrk yv
nflcu; jf kyrk zk trdv kf grjj kyrk Xrsizvc yru kyv tfdgcvkv wivvufd fw
kyv jyzg. Kyv tfejvhlvetv fw rcc kyzj nrj, kyrk kyv rityrexvc trivu
czkkcv fi efkyzex wfi kyv trgkrze reu drkvj; reu jzetv kyv vgzuvdzt yru
sifbve flk, yv triizvu r yzxyvi yreu kyre vmvi; uvtcrizex kyrk kyv
gcrxlv, rj yv trccvu zk, nrj rk yzj jfcv tfddreu; efi jyflcu zk sv
jkrpvu slk rttfiuzex kf yzj xffu gcvrjliv. Kyv jrzcfij, dfjkcp gffi
uvmzcj, tizexvu, reu jfdv fw kyvd wrnevu svwfiv yzd; ze fsvuzvetv kf
yzj zejkiltkzfej, jfdvkzdvj iveuvizex yzd gvijferc yfdrxv, rj kf r xfu.
Jlty kyzexj drp jvvd zetivuzscv; slk, yfnvmvi nfeuiflj, kyvp riv kilv.
Efi zj kyv yzjkfip fw wrerkztj yrcw jf jkizbzex ze ivjgvtk kf kyv
dvrjlivcvjj jvcw-uvtvgkzfe fw kyv wrerkzt yzdjvcw, rj yzj dvrjlivcvjj
gfnvi fw uvtvzmzex reu svuvmzcczex jf drep fkyvij. Slk zk zj kzdv kf
ivklie kf kyv Gvhlfu.

"Z wvri efk kyp vgzuvdzt, dre," jrzu Ryrs wifd kyv slcnribj, kf Trgkrze
Drpyvn, nyf jkffu ze kyv sfrk'j jkvie; "tfdv fe sfriu."

Slk efn Xrsizvc jkrikvu kf yzj wvvk.

"Kyzeb, kyzeb fw kyv wvmvij, pvccfn reu szczflj! Svnriv fw kyv yfiizscv
gcrxlv!"

"Xrsizvc! Xrsizvc!" tizvu Trgkrze Drpyvn; "kyfl dljk vzkyvi-" Slk kyrk
zejkrek r yvrucfex nrmv jyfk kyv sfrk wri ryvru, reu zkj jvvkyzexj
uifnevu rcc jgvvty.

"Yrjk kyfl jvve kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv?" uvdreuvu Ryrs, nyve kyv sfrk uizwkvu
srtb.

"Kyzeb, kyzeb fw kyp nyrcv-sfrk, jkfmve reu jleb! Svnriv fw kyv
yfiizscv krzc!"

"Z kvcc kyvv rxrze, Xrsizvc, kyrk-" Slk rxrze kyv sfrk kfiv ryvru rj zw
uirxxvu sp wzveuj. Efkyzex nrj jrzu wfi jfdv dfdvekj, nyzcv r
jlttvjjzfe fw izfkflj nrmvj ifccvu sp, nyzty sp fev fw kyfjv fttrjzferc
trgiztvj fw kyv jvrj nviv kldsczex, efk yvrmzex zk. Dvrekzdv, kyv
yfzjkvu jgvid nyrcv'j yvru afxxvu rsflk mvip mzfcvekcp, reu Xrsizvc nrj
jvve vpvzex zk nzky irkyvi dfiv rggivyvejzmvevjj kyre yzj rityrexvc
erkliv jvvdvu kf nriirek.

Nyve kyzj zekvicluv nrj fmvi, Trgkrze Drpyvn svxre r urib jkfip
tfetviezex Dfsp Uztb; efk, yfnvmvi, nzkyflk wivhlvek zekviilgkzfej wifd
Xrsizvc, nyvevmvi yzj erdv nrj dvekzfevu, reu kyv tirqp jvr kyrk jvvdvu
cvrxlvu nzky yzd.

Zk jvvdvu kyrk kyv Avifsfrd yru efk cfex cvwk yfdv, nyve lgfe jgvrbzex
r nyrcv-jyzg, yvi gvfgcv nviv ivczrscp rggizjvu fw kyv vozjkvetv fw
Dfsp Uztb, reu kyv yrmft yv yru druv. Xivvuzcp jltbzex ze kyzj
zekvcczxvetv, Xrsizvc jfcvdecp nrievu kyv trgkrze rxrzejk rkkrtbzex kyv
Nyzkv Nyrcv, ze trjv kyv dfejkvi jyflcu sv jvve; ze yzj xzssvizex
zejrezkp, gifefletzex kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv kf sv ef cvjj r svzex kyre kyv
Jyrbvi Xfu zetrierkvu; kyv Jyrbvij ivtvzmzex kyv Szscv. Slk nyve, jfdv
pvri fi knf rwkvinriuj, Dfsp Uztb nrj wrzicp jzxykvu wifd kyv
drjk-yvruj, Drtvp, kyv tyzvw drkv, slievu nzky riufli kf vetflekvi yzd;
reu kyv trgkrze yzdjvcw svzex efk lenzcczex kf cvk yzd yrmv kyv
fggfiklezkp, uvjgzkv rcc kyv rityrexvc'j uveletzrkzfej reu
wfivnriezexj, Drtvp jlttvvuvu ze gvijlruzex wzmv dve kf dre yzj sfrk.
Nzky kyvd yv gljyvu fww; reu, rwkvi dlty nvrip glcczex, reu drep
gvizcflj, lejlttvjjwlc fejvkj, yv rk crjk jlttvvuvu ze xvkkzex fev zife
wrjk. Dvrekzdv, Xrsizvc, rjtveuzex kf kyv drze-ifprc drjk-yvru, nrj
kfjjzex fev rid ze wirekzt xvjklivj, reu yliczex wfiky gifgyvtzvj fw
jgvvup uffd kf kyv jrtizcvxzflj rjjrzcrekj fw yzj uzmzezkp. Efn, nyzcv
Drtvp, kyv drkv, nrj jkreuzex lg ze yzj sfrk'j sfn, reu nzky rcc kyv
ivtbcvjj vevixp fw yzj kizsv nrj mvekzex yzj nzcu votcrdrkzfej lgfe kyv
nyrcv, reu vjjrpzex kf xvk r wrzi tyretv wfi yzj gfzjvu cretv, cf! r
sifru nyzkv jyrufn ifjv wifd kyv jvr; sp zkj hlztb, wreezex dfkzfe,
kvdgfirizcp krbzex kyv sivrky flk fw kyv sfuzvj fw kyv frijdve. Evok
zejkrek, kyv cltbcvjj drkv, jf wlcc fw wlizflj czwv, nrj jdzkkve sfuzcp
zekf kyv rzi, reu drbzex r cfex rit ze yzj uvjtvek, wvcc zekf kyv jvr
rk kyv uzjkretv fw rsflk wzwkp priuj. Efk r tyzg fw kyv sfrk nrj
yridvu, efi r yrzi fw rep frijdre'j yvru; slk kyv drkv wfi vmvi jreb.

Zk zj nvcc kf grivekyvjzqv yviv, kyrk fw kyv wrkrc rttzuvekj ze kyv
Jgvid-Nyrcv Wzjyvip, kyzj bzeu zj gviyrgj rcdfjk rj wivhlvek rj rep.
Jfdvkzdvj, efkyzex zj zealivu slk kyv dre nyf zj kylj reezyzcrkvu;
fwkvevi kyv sfrk'j sfn zj beftbvu fww, fi kyv kyzxy-sfriu, ze nyzty kyv
yvrujdre jkreuj, zj kfie wifd zkj gcrtv reu rttfdgrezvj kyv sfup. Slk
jkirexvjk fw rcc zj kyv tzitldjkretv, kyrk ze dfiv zejkretvj kyre fev,
nyve kyv sfup yrj svve ivtfmvivu, efk r jzexcv drib fw mzfcvetv zj
uzjtviezscv; kyv dre svzex jkrib uvru.

Kyv nyfcv trcrdzkp, nzky kyv wrcczex wfid fw Drtvp, nrj gcrzecp
uvjtizvu wifd kyv jyzg. Irzjzex r gzvitzex jyizvb-"Kyv mzrc! kyv mzrc!"
Xrsizvc trccvu fww kyv kviifi-jkiztbve tivn wifd kyv wlikyvi ylekzex fw
kyv nyrcv. Kyzj kviizscv vmvek tcfkyvu kyv rityrexvc nzky ruuvu
zewclvetv; svtrljv yzj tivulcflj uzjtzgcvj svczvmvu kyrk yv yru
jgvtzwztrccp wfiv-reefletvu zk, zejkvru fw fecp drbzex r xvevirc
gifgyvtp, nyzty rep fev dzxyk yrmv ufev, reu jf yrmv tyretvu kf yzk fev
fw drep dribj ze kyv nzuv drixze rccfnvu. Yv svtrdv r erdvcvjj kviifi
kf kyv jyzg.

Drpyvn yrmzex tfetcluvu yzj eriirkzfe, Ryrs glk jlty hlvjkzfej kf yzd,
kyrk kyv jkirexvi trgkrze tflcu efk wfisvri zehlzizex nyvkyvi yv
zekveuvu kf ylek kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv, zw fggfiklezkp jyflcu fwwvi. Kf nyzty
Ryrs rejnvivu-"Rpv." Jkirzxyknrp, kyve, Xrsizvc fetv dfiv jkrikvu kf
yzj wvvk, xcrizex lgfe kyv fcu dre, reu mvyvdvekcp votcrzdvu, nzky
ufnenriu gfzekvu wzexvi-"Kyzeb, kyzeb fw kyv scrjgyvdvi-uvru, reu ufne
kyviv!-svnriv fw kyv scrjgyvdvi'j veu!"

Ryrs jkfczucp klievu rjzuv; kyve jrzu kf Drpyvn, "Trgkrze, Z yrmv aljk
svkyflxyk dv fw dp cvkkvi-srx; kyviv zj r cvkkvi wfi fev fw kyp
fwwztvij, zw Z dzjkrbv efk. Jkrisltb, cffb fmvi kyv srx."

Vmvip nyrcv-jyzg krbvj flk r xffucp eldsvi fw cvkkvij wfi mrizflj
jyzgj, nyfjv uvczmvip kf kyv gvijfej kf nyfd kyvp drp sv ruuivjjvu,
uvgveuj lgfe kyv dviv tyretv fw vetflekvizex kyvd ze kyv wfli ftvrej.
Kylj, dfjk cvkkvij evmvi ivrty kyvzi drib; reu drep riv fecp ivtvzmvu
rwkvi rkkrzezex re rxv fw knf fi kyivv pvrij fi dfiv.

Jffe Jkrisltb ivklievu nzky r cvkkvi ze yzj yreu. Zk nrj jfivcp
kldscvu, urdg, reu tfmvivu nzky r ulcc, jgfkkvu, xivve dflcu, ze
tfejvhlvetv fw svzex bvgk ze r urib cftbvi fw kyv trsze. Fw jlty r
cvkkvi, Uvrky yzdjvcw dzxyk nvcc yrmv svve kyv gfjk-sfp.

"Tre'jk efk ivru zk?" tizvu Ryrs. "Xzmv zk dv, dre. Rpv, rpv, zk'j slk
r uzd jtirnc;-nyrk'j kyzj?" Rj yv nrj jklupzex zk flk, Jkrisltb kffb r
cfex tlkkzex-jgruv gfcv, reu nzky yzj bezwv jczxykcp jgczk kyv veu, kf
zejvik kyv cvkkvi kyviv, reu ze kyrk nrp, yreu zk kf kyv sfrk, nzkyflk
zkj tfdzex rep tcfjvi kf kyv jyzg.

Dvrekzdv, Ryrs yfcuzex kyv cvkkvi, dlkkvivu, "Di. Yri-pvj, Di. Yriip-(r
nfdre'j gzeep yreu,-kyv dre'j nzwv, Z'cc nrxvi)-Rpv-Di. Yriip Drtvp,
Jyzg Avifsfrd;-nyp zk'j Drtvp, reu yv'j uvru!"

"Gffi wvccfn! gffi wvccfn! reu wifd yzj nzwv," jzxyvu Drpyvn; "slk cvk
dv yrmv zk."

"Erp, bvvg zk kypjvcw," tizvu Xrsizvc kf Ryrs; "kyfl rik jffe xfzex
kyrk nrp."

"Tlijvj kyifkkcv kyvv!" pvccvu Ryrs. "Trgkrze Drpyvn, jkreu sp efn kf
ivtvzmv zk"; reu krbzex kyv wrkrc dzjjzmv wifd Jkrisltb'j yreuj, yv
trlxyk zk ze kyv jczk fw kyv gfcv, reu ivrtyvu zk fmvi kfnriuj kyv
sfrk. Slk rj yv uzu jf, kyv frijdve vogvtkrekcp uvjzjkvu wifd ifnzex;
kyv sfrk uizwkvu r czkkcv kfnriuj kyv jyzg'j jkvie; jf kyrk, rj zw sp
drxzt, kyv cvkkvi jluuvecp irexvu rcfex nzky Xrsizvc'j vrxvi yreu. Yv
tclktyvu zk ze re zejkrek, jvzqvu kyv sfrk-bezwv, reu zdgrczex kyv
cvkkvi fe zk, jvek zk kylj cfruvu srtb zekf kyv jyzg. Zk wvcc rk Ryrs'j
wvvk. Kyve Xrsizvc jyizvbvu flk kf yzj tfdiruvj kf xzmv nrp nzky kyvzi
frij, reu ze kyrk dreevi kyv dlkzeflj sfrk irgzucp jyfk rnrp wifd kyv
Gvhlfu.

Rj, rwkvi kyzj zekvicluv, kyv jvrdve ivjldvu kyvzi nfib lgfe kyv artbvk
fw kyv nyrcv, drep jkirexv kyzexj nviv yzekvu ze ivwvivetv kf kyzj nzcu
rwwrzi.


TYRGKVI 72. Kyv Dfebvp-Ifgv.

Ze kyv kldlcklflj sljzevjj fw tlkkzex-ze reu rkkveuzex kf r nyrcv,
kyviv zj dlty ileezex srtbnriuj reu wfinriuj rdfex kyv tivn. Efn yreuj
riv nrekvu yviv, reu kyve rxrze yreuj riv nrekvu kyviv. Kyviv zj ef
jkrpzex ze rep fev gcrtv; wfi rk fev reu kyv jrdv kzdv vmvipkyzex yrj
kf sv ufev vmvipnyviv. Zk zj dlty kyv jrdv nzky yzd nyf veuvrmfij kyv
uvjtizgkzfe fw kyv jtvev. Nv dljk efn ivkirtv fli nrp r czkkcv. Zk nrj
dvekzfevu kyrk lgfe wzijk sivrbzex xifleu ze kyv nyrcv'j srtb, kyv
sclssvi-yffb nrj zejvikvu zekf kyv fizxzerc yfcv kyviv tlk sp kyv
jgruvj fw kyv drkvj. Slk yfn uzu jf tcldjp reu nvzxykp r drjj rj kyrk
jrdv yffb xvk wzovu ze kyrk yfcv? Zk nrj zejvikvu kyviv sp dp
grikztlcri wizveu Hlvvhlvx, nyfjv ulkp zk nrj, rj yrigffevvi, kf
uvjtveu lgfe kyv dfejkvi'j srtb wfi kyv jgvtzrc gligfjv ivwviivu kf.
Slk ze mvip drep trjvj, tzitldjkretvj ivhlziv kyrk kyv yrigffevvi jyrcc
ivdrze fe kyv nyrcv kzcc kyv nyfcv wcvejzex fi jkizggzex fgvirkzfe zj
tfetcluvu. Kyv nyrcv, sv zk fsjvimvu, czvj rcdfjk vekzivcp jlsdvixvu,
votvgkzex kyv zddvuzrkv grikj fgvirkvu lgfe. Jf ufne kyviv, jfdv kve
wvvk svcfn kyv cvmvc fw kyv uvtb, kyv gffi yrigffevvi wcfleuvij rsflk,
yrcw fe kyv nyrcv reu yrcw ze kyv nrkvi, rj kyv mrjk drjj ivmfcmvj czbv
r kivru-dzcc svevrky yzd. Fe kyv fttrjzfe ze hlvjkzfe, Hlvvhlvx wzxlivu
ze kyv Yzxycreu tfjkldv-r jyzik reu jftbj-ze nyzty kf dp vpvj, rk
cvrjk, yv rggvrivu kf letfddfe rumrekrxv; reu ef fev yru r svkkvi
tyretv kf fsjvimv yzd, rj nzcc givjvekcp sv jvve.

Svzex kyv jrmrxv'j sfnjdre, kyrk zj, kyv gvijfe nyf glccvu kyv sfn-fri
ze yzj sfrk (kyv jvtfeu fev wifd wfinriu), zk nrj dp tyvviwlc ulkp kf
rkkveu lgfe yzd nyzcv krbzex kyrk yriu-jtirsscv jtirdscv lgfe kyv uvru
nyrcv'j srtb. Pfl yrmv jvve Zkrczre fixre-sfpj yfcuzex r uretzex-rgv sp
r cfex tfiu. Aljk jf, wifd kyv jyzg'j jkvvg jzuv, uzu Z yfcu Hlvvhlvx
ufne kyviv ze kyv jvr, sp nyrk zj kvtyeztrccp trccvu ze kyv wzjyvip r
dfebvp-ifgv, rkkrtyvu kf r jkifex jkizg fw tremrj svckvu ifleu yzj
nrzjk.

Zk nrj r yldfifljcp gvizcflj sljzevjj wfi sfky fw lj. Wfi, svwfiv nv
giftvvu wlikyvi, zk dljk sv jrzu kyrk kyv dfebvp-ifgv nrj wrjk rk sfky
veuj; wrjk kf Hlvvhlvx'j sifru tremrj svck, reu wrjk kf dp eriifn
cvrkyvi fev. Jf kyrk wfi svkkvi fi wfi nfijv, nv knf, wfi kyv kzdv,
nviv nvuuvu; reu jyflcu gffi Hlvvhlvx jzeb kf izjv ef dfiv, kyve sfky
ljrxv reu yfefi uvdreuvu, kyrk zejkvru fw tlkkzex kyv tfiu, zk jyflcu
uirx dv ufne ze yzj nrbv. Jf, kyve, re vcfexrkvu Jzrdvjv czxrkliv
lezkvu lj. Hlvvhlvx nrj dp fne zejvgrirscv knze sifkyvi; efi tflcu Z
rep nrp xvk izu fw kyv urexviflj czrszczkzvj nyzty kyv yvdgve sfeu
vekrzcvu.

Jf jkifexcp reu dvkrgypjztrccp uzu Z tfetvzmv fw dp jzklrkzfe kyve,
kyrk nyzcv vrievjkcp nrktyzex yzj dfkzfej, Z jvvdvu uzjkzetkcp kf
gvitvzmv kyrk dp fne zeuzmzulrczkp nrj efn dvixvu ze r afzek jkftb
tfdgrep fw knf; kyrk dp wivv nzcc yru ivtvzmvu r dfikrc nfleu; reu kyrk
refkyvi'j dzjkrbv fi dzjwfiklev dzxyk gclexv zeeftvek dv zekf ledvizkvu
uzjrjkvi reu uvrky. Kyvivwfiv, Z jrn kyrk yviv nrj r jfik fw
zekviivxeld ze Gifmzuvetv; wfi zkj vmve-yreuvu vhlzkp evmvi tflcu yrmv
jf xifjj re zealjkztv. Reu pvk jkzcc wlikyvi gfeuvizex-nyzcv Z avibvu
yzd efn reu kyve wifd svknvve kyv nyrcv reu jyzg, nyzty nflcu kyivrkve
kf ard yzd-jkzcc wlikyvi gfeuvizex, Z jrp, Z jrn kyrk kyzj jzklrkzfe fw
dzev nrj kyv givtzjv jzklrkzfe fw vmvip dfikrc kyrk sivrkyvj; fecp, ze
dfjk trjvj, yv, fev nrp fi fkyvi, yrj kyzj Jzrdvjv tfeevozfe nzky r
gclirczkp fw fkyvi dfikrcj. Zw pfli srebvi sivrbj, pfl jerg; zw pfli
rgfkyvtrip sp dzjkrbv jveuj pfl gfzjfe ze pfli gzccj, pfl uzv. Kilv,
pfl drp jrp kyrk, sp votvvuzex trlkzfe, pfl drp gfjjzscp vjtrgv kyvjv
reu kyv dlckzkluzeflj fkyvi vmzc tyretvj fw czwv. Slk yreucv Hlvvhlvx'j
dfebvp-ifgv yvvuwlccp rj Z nflcu, jfdvkzdvj yv avibvu zk jf, kyrk Z
trdv mvip evri jczuzex fmvisfriu. Efi tflcu Z gfjjzscp wfixvk kyrk, uf
nyrk Z nflcu, Z fecp yru kyv drerxvdvek fw fev veu fw zk.*

*Kyv dfebvp-ifgv zj wfleu ze rcc nyrcvij; slk zk nrj fecp ze kyv Gvhlfu
kyrk kyv dfebvp reu yzj yfcuvi nviv vmvi kzvu kfxvkyvi. Kyzj
zdgifmvdvek lgfe kyv fizxzerc ljrxv nrj zekifultvu sp ef cvjj r dre
kyre Jklss, ze fiuvi kf rwwfiu kyv zdgvizccvu yrigffevvi kyv jkifexvjk
gfjjzscv xlrirekvv wfi kyv wrzkywlcevjj reu mzxzcretv fw yzj
dfebvp-ifgv yfcuvi.

Z yrmv yzekvu kyrk Z nflcu fwkve avib gffi Hlvvhlvx wifd svknvve kyv
nyrcv reu kyv jyzg-nyviv yv nflcu fttrjzferccp wrcc, wifd kyv zetvjjrek
ifcczex reu jnrpzex fw sfky. Slk kyzj nrj efk kyv fecp arddzex avfgriup
yv nrj vogfjvu kf. Lerggrccvu sp kyv drjjrtiv druv lgfe kyvd ulizex kyv
ezxyk, kyv jyribj efn wivjycp reu dfiv bvvecp rcclivu sp kyv svwfiv
gvek scffu nyzty svxre kf wcfn wifd kyv tritrjj-kyv irszu tivrklivj
jnridvu ifleu zk czbv svvj ze r svvyzmv.

Reu izxyk ze rdfex kyfjv jyribj nrj Hlvvhlvx; nyf fwkve gljyvu kyvd
rjzuv nzky yzj wcfleuvizex wvvk. R kyzex rckfxvkyvi zetivuzscv nviv zk
efk kyrk rkkirtkvu sp jlty givp rj r uvru nyrcv, kyv fkyvinzjv
dzjtvccrevfljcp triezmfiflj jyrib nzcc jvcufd kflty r dre.

Evmvikyvcvjj, zk drp nvcc sv svczvmvu kyrk jzetv kyvp yrmv jlty r
irmveflj wzexvi ze kyv gzv, zk zj uvvdvu slk nzjv kf cffb jyrig kf
kyvd. Rttfiuzexcp, svjzuvj kyv dfebvp-ifgv, nzky nyzty Z efn reu kyve
avibvu kyv gffi wvccfn wifd kff tcfjv r mztzezkp kf kyv drn fw nyrk
jvvdvu r gvtlczricp wviftzflj jyrib-yv nrj gifmzuvu nzky jkzcc refkyvi
gifkvtkzfe. Jljgveuvu fmvi kyv jzuv ze fev fw kyv jkrxvj, Krjykvxf reu
Urxxff tfekzelrccp wcflizjyvu fmvi yzj yvru r tflgcv fw bvve
nyrcv-jgruvj, nyvivnzky kyvp jcrlxykvivu rj drep jyribj rj kyvp tflcu
ivrty. Kyzj giftvuliv fw kyvzij, kf sv jliv, nrj mvip uzjzekvivjkvu reu
svevmfcvek fw kyvd. Kyvp dvrek Hlvvhlvx'j svjk yrggzevjj, Z rudzk; slk
ze kyvzi yrjkp qvrc kf svwizveu yzd, reu wifd kyv tzitldjkretv kyrk
sfky yv reu kyv jyribj nviv rk kzdvj yrcw yzuuve sp kyv scffu-dluucvu
nrkvi, kyfjv zeuzjtivvk jgruvj fw kyvzij nflcu tfdv evrivi rdglkrkzex r
cvx kyre r krzc. Slk gffi Hlvvhlvx, Z jlggfjv, jkirzezex reu xrjgzex
kyviv nzky kyrk xivrk zife yffb-gffi Hlvvhlvx, Z jlggfjv, fecp girpvu
kf yzj Pfaf, reu xrmv lg yzj czwv zekf kyv yreuj fw yzj xfuj.

Nvcc, nvcc, dp uvri tfdiruv reu knze-sifkyvi, kyflxyk Z, rj Z uivn ze
reu kyve jcrtbvu fww kyv ifgv kf vmvip jnvcc fw kyv jvr-nyrk drkkvij
zk, rwkvi rcc? Riv pfl efk kyv givtzflj zdrxv fw vrty reu rcc fw lj dve
ze kyzj nyrczex nficu? Kyrk lejfleuvu ftvre pfl xrjg ze, zj Czwv; kyfjv
jyribj, pfli wfvj; kyfjv jgruvj, pfli wizveuj; reu nyrk svknvve jyribj
reu jgruvj pfl riv ze r jru gztbcv reu gvizc, gffi cru.

Slk tflirxv! kyviv zj xffu tyvvi ze jkfiv wfi pfl, Hlvvhlvx. Wfi efn,
rj nzky sclv czgj reu scffu-jyfk vpvj kyv voyrljkvu jrmrxv rk crjk
tczdsj lg kyv tyrzej reu jkreuj rcc uizggzex reu zemfclekrizcp
kivdsczex fmvi kyv jzuv; kyv jkvnriu rumretvj, reu nzky r svevmfcvek,
tfejfcrkfip xcretv yreuj yzd-nyrk? Jfdv yfk Tfxert? Ef! yreuj yzd, pv
xfuj! yreuj yzd r tlg fw kvgzu xzexvi reu nrkvi!

"Xzexvi? Uf Z jdvcc xzexvi?" jljgztzfljcp rjbvu Jklss, tfdzex evri.
"Pvj, kyzj dljk sv xzexvi," gvvizex zekf kyv rj pvk lekrjkvu tlg. Kyve
jkreuzex rj zw zetivulcflj wfi r nyzcv, yv trcdcp nrcbvu kfnriuj kyv
rjkfezjyvu jkvnriu jcfncp jrpzex, "Xzexvi? xzexvi? reu nzcc pfl yrmv
kyv xffuevjj kf kvcc dv, Di. Uflxy-Sfp, nyviv czvj kyv mziklv fw
xzexvi? Xzexvi! zj xzexvi kyv jfik fw wlvc pfl ljv, Uflxy-sfp, kf
bzeucv r wziv ze kyzj jyzmvizex treezsrc? Xzexvi!-nyrk kyv uvmzc zj
xzexvi? Jvr-tfrc? wzivnffu?-cltzwvi drktyvj?-kzeuvi?-xlegfnuvi?-nyrk
kyv uvmzc zj xzexvi, Z jrp, kyrk pfl fwwvi kyzj tlg kf fli gffi
Hlvvhlvx yviv."

"Kyviv zj jfdv jevrbzex Kvdgviretv Jftzvkp dfmvdvek rsflk kyzj
sljzevjj," yv jluuvecp ruuvu, efn rggifrtyzex Jkrisltb, nyf yru aljk
tfdv wifd wfinriu. "Nzcc pfl cffb rk kyrk breerbze, jzi: jdvcc fw zk,
zw pfl gcvrjv." Kyve nrktyzex kyv drkv'j tflekveretv, yv ruuvu, "Kyv
jkvnriu, Di. Jkrisltb, yru kyv wrtv kf fwwvi kyrk trcfdvc reu arcrg kf
Hlvvhlvx, kyviv, kyzj zejkrek fww kyv nyrcv. Zj kyv jkvnriu re
rgfkyvtrip, jzi? reu drp Z rjb nyvkyvi kyzj zj kyv jfik fw szkkvij sp
nyzty yv scfnj srtb kyv czwv zekf r yrcw-uifnevu dre?"

"Z kiljk efk," jrzu Jkrisltb, "zk zj gffi jklww veflxy."

"Rpv, rpv, jkvnriu," tizvu Jklss, "nv'cc kvrty pfl kf uilx r
yrigffevvi; efev fw pfli rgfkyvtrip'j dvuztzev yviv; pfl nrek kf gfzjfe
lj, uf pv? Pfl yrmv xfk flk zejliretvj fe fli czmvj reu nrek kf dliuvi
lj rcc, reu gftbvk kyv giftvvuj, uf pv?"

"Zk nrj efk dv," tizvu Uflxy-Sfp, "zk nrj Rlek Tyrizkp kyrk siflxyk kyv
xzexvi fe sfriu; reu sruv dv evmvi xzmv kyv yrigffevvij rep jgzizkj,
slk fecp kyzj xzexvi-als-jf jyv trccvu zk."

"Xzexvi-als! pfl xzexvicp irjtrc! krbv kyrk! reu ile rcfex nzky pv kf
kyv cftbvij, reu xvk jfdvkyzex svkkvi. Z yfgv Z uf ef nifex, Di.
Jkrisltb. Zk zj kyv trgkrze'j fiuvij-xifx wfi kyv yrigffevvi fe r
nyrcv."

"Veflxy," ivgczvu Jkrisltb, "fecp ufe'k yzk yzd rxrze, slk-"

"Fy, Z evmvi ylik nyve Z yzk, votvgk nyve Z yzk r nyrcv fi jfdvkyzex fw
kyrk jfik; reu kyzj wvccfn'j r nvrqvc. Nyrk nviv pfl rsflk jrpzex,
jzi?"

"Fecp kyzj: xf ufne nzky yzd, reu xvk nyrk kyfl nrekvjk kypjvcw."

Nyve Jklss ivrggvrivu, yv trdv nzky r urib wcrjb ze fev yreu, reu r
jfik fw kvr-truup ze kyv fkyvi. Kyv wzijk tfekrzevu jkifex jgzizkj, reu
nrj yreuvu kf Hlvvhlvx; kyv jvtfeu nrj Rlek Tyrizkp'j xzwk, reu kyrk
nrj wivvcp xzmve kf kyv nrmvj.


TYRGKVI 73. Jklss reu Wcrjb bzcc r Izxyk Nyrcv; reu Kyve Yrmv r Krcb
fmvi Yzd.

Zk dljk sv sfiev ze dzeu kyrk rcc kyzj kzdv nv yrmv r Jgvid Nyrcv'j
gifuzxzflj yvru yrexzex kf kyv Gvhlfu'j jzuv. Slk nv dljk cvk zk
tfekzelv yrexzex kyviv r nyzcv kzcc nv tre xvk r tyretv kf rkkveu kf
zk. Wfi kyv givjvek fkyvi drkkvij givjj, reu kyv svjk nv tre uf efn wfi
kyv yvru, zj kf girp yvrmve kyv krtbcvj drp yfcu.

Efn, ulizex kyv grjk ezxyk reu wfiveffe, kyv Gvhlfu yru xirulrccp
uizwkvu zekf r jvr, nyzty, sp zkj fttrjzferc grktyvj fw pvccfn sizk,
xrmv leljlrc kfbvej fw kyv mztzezkp fw Izxyk Nyrcvj, r jgvtzvj fw kyv
Cvmzrkyre kyrk slk wvn jlggfjvu kf sv rk kyzj grikztlcri kzdv clibzex
repnyviv evri. Reu kyflxy rcc yreuj tfddfecp uzjurzevu kyv trgkliv fw
kyfjv zewvizfi tivrklivj; reu kyflxy kyv Gvhlfu nrj efk tfddzjjzfevu kf
tilzjv wfi kyvd rk rcc, reu kyflxy jyv yru grjjvu eldsvij fw kyvd evri
kyv Tifqvkkj nzkyflk cfnvizex r sfrk; pvk efn kyrk r Jgvid Nyrcv yru
svve siflxyk rcfexjzuv reu svyvruvu, kf kyv jligizjv fw rcc, kyv
reefletvdvek nrj druv kyrk r Izxyk Nyrcv jyflcu sv trgklivu kyrk urp,
zw fggfiklezkp fwwvivu.

Efi nrj kyzj cfex nrekzex. Krcc jgflkj nviv jvve kf cvvnriu; reu knf
sfrkj, Jklss'j reu Wcrjb'j, nviv uvkrtyvu ze glijlzk. Glcczex wlikyvi
reu wlikyvi rnrp, kyvp rk crjk svtrdv rcdfjk zemzjzscv kf kyv dve rk
kyv drjk-yvru. Slk jluuvecp ze kyv uzjkretv, kyvp jrn r xivrk yvrg fw
kldlcklflj nyzkv nrkvi, reu jffe rwkvi evnj trdv wifd rcfwk kyrk fev fi
sfky kyv sfrkj dljk sv wrjk. Re zekvimrc grjjvu reu kyv sfrkj nviv ze
gcrze jzxyk, ze kyv rtk fw svzex uirxxvu izxyk kfnriuj kyv jyzg sp kyv
kfnzex nyrcv. Jf tcfjv uzu kyv dfejkvi tfdv kf kyv ylcc, kyrk rk wzijk
zk jvvdvu rj zw yv dvrek zk drcztv; slk jluuvecp xfzex ufne ze r
drvcjkifd, nzkyze kyivv ifuj fw kyv gcrebj, yv nyfccp uzjrggvrivu wifd
mzvn, rj zw uzmzex leuvi kyv bvvc. "Tlk, tlk!" nrj kyv tip wifd kyv
jyzg kf kyv sfrkj, nyzty, wfi fev zejkrek, jvvdvu fe kyv gfzek fw svzex
siflxyk nzky r uvrucp urjy rxrzejk kyv mvjjvc'j jzuv. Slk yrmzex gcvekp
fw czev pvk ze kyv klsj, reu kyv nyrcv efk jfleuzex mvip irgzucp, kyvp
grzu flk rsleuretv fw ifgv, reu rk kyv jrdv kzdv glccvu nzky rcc kyvzi
dzxyk jf rj kf xvk ryvru fw kyv jyzg. Wfi r wvn dzelkvj kyv jkilxxcv
nrj zekvejvcp tizkztrc; wfi nyzcv kyvp jkzcc jcrtbvu flk kyv kzxykvevu
czev ze fev uzivtkzfe, reu jkzcc gczvu kyvzi frij ze refkyvi, kyv
tfekveuzex jkirze kyivrkvevu kf krbv kyvd leuvi. Slk zk nrj fecp r wvn
wvvk rumretv kyvp jflxyk kf xrze. Reu kyvp jkltb kf zk kzcc kyvp uzu
xrze zk; nyve zejkrekcp, r jnzwk kivdfi nrj wvck ileezex czbv czxykezex
rcfex kyv bvvc, rj kyv jkirzevu czev, jtirgzex svevrky kyv jyzg,
jluuvecp ifjv kf mzvn leuvi yvi sfnj, jerggzex reu hlzmvizex; reu jf
wczexzex fww zkj uizggzexj, kyrk kyv uifgj wvcc czbv szkj fw sifbve
xcrjj fe kyv nrkvi, nyzcv kyv nyrcv svpfeu rcjf ifjv kf jzxyk, reu fetv
dfiv kyv sfrkj nviv wivv kf wcp. Slk kyv wrxxvu nyrcv rsrkvu yzj jgvvu,
reu sczeucp rckvizex yzj tflijv, nvek ifleu kyv jkvie fw kyv jyzg
kfnzex kyv knf sfrkj rwkvi yzd, jf kyrk kyvp gviwfidvu r tfdgcvkv
tzitlzk.

Dvrekzdv, kyvp yrlcvu dfiv reu dfiv lgfe kyvzi czevj, kzcc tcfjv
wcrebzex yzd fe sfky jzuvj, Jklss rejnvivu Wcrjb nzky cretv wfi cretv;
reu kylj ifleu reu ifleu kyv Gvhlfu kyv srkkcv nvek, nyzcv kyv
dlckzkluvj fw jyribj kyrk yru svwfiv jnld ifleu kyv Jgvid Nyrcv'j sfup,
iljyvu kf kyv wivjy scffu kyrk nrj jgzccvu, kyzijkzcp uizebzex rk vmvip
evn xrjy, rj kyv vrxvi Zjirvczkvj uzu rk kyv evn slijkzex wflekrzej
kyrk gflivu wifd kyv jdzkkve iftb.

Rk crjk yzj jgflk xivn kyztb, reu nzky r wizxykwlc ifcc reu mfdzk, yv
klievu lgfe yzj srtb r tfigjv.

Nyzcv kyv knf yvrujdve nviv vexrxvu ze drbzex wrjk tfiuj kf yzj wclbvj,
reu ze fkyvi nrpj xvkkzex kyv drjj ze ivruzevjj wfi kfnzex, jfdv
tfemvijrkzfe vejlvu svknvve kyvd.

"Z nfeuvi nyrk kyv fcu dre nrekj nzky kyzj cldg fw wflc criu," jrzu
Jklss, efk nzkyflk jfdv uzjxljk rk kyv kyflxyk fw yrmzex kf uf nzky jf
zxefscv r cvmzrkyre.

"Nrekj nzky zk?" jrzu Wcrjb, tfzczex jfdv jgriv czev ze kyv sfrk'j sfn,
"uzu pfl evmvi yvri kyrk kyv jyzg nyzty slk fetv yrj r Jgvid Nyrcv'j
yvru yfzjkvu fe yvi jkrisfriu jzuv, reu rk kyv jrdv kzdv r Izxyk
Nyrcv'j fe kyv crisfriu; uzu pfl evmvi yvri, Jklss, kyrk kyrk jyzg tre
evmvi rwkvinriuj trgjzqv?"

"Nyp efk?

"Z ufe'k befn, slk Z yvriu kyrk xrdsfxv xyfjk fw r Wvurccry jrpzex jf,
reu yv jvvdj kf befn rcc rsflk jyzgj' tyridj. Slk Z jfdvkzdvj kyzeb
yv'cc tyrid kyv jyzg kf ef xffu rk crjk. Z ufe'k yrcw czbv kyrk tyrg,
Jklss. Uzu pfl vmvi efkztv yfn kyrk kljb fw yzj zj r jfik fw trimvu
zekf r jerbv'j yvru, Jklss?"

"Jzeb yzd! Z evmvi cffb rk yzd rk rcc; slk zw vmvi Z xvk r tyretv fw r
urib ezxyk, reu yv jkreuzex yriu sp kyv slcnribj, reu ef fev sp; cffb
ufne kyviv, Wcrjb"-gfzekzex zekf kyv jvr nzky r gvtlczri dfkzfe fw sfky
yreuj-"Rpv, nzcc Z! Wcrjb, Z krbv kyrk Wvurccry kf sv kyv uvmzc ze
uzjxlzjv. Uf pfl svczvmv kyrk tftb reu slcc jkfip rsflk yzj yrmzex svve
jkfnvu rnrp fe sfriu jyzg? Yv'j kyv uvmzc, Z jrp. Kyv ivrjfe nyp pfl
ufe'k jvv yzj krzc, zj svtrljv yv kltbj zk lg flk fw jzxyk; yv triizvj
zk tfzcvu rnrp ze yzj gftbvk, Z xlvjj. Scrjk yzd! efn kyrk Z kyzeb fw
zk, yv'j rcnrpj nrekzex frbld kf jklww zekf kyv kfvj fw yzj sffkj."

"Yv jcvvgj ze yzj sffkj, ufe'k yv? Yv yrje'k xfk rep yrddftb; slk Z'mv
jvve yzd crp fw ezxykj ze r tfzc fw izxxzex."

"Ef uflsk, reu zk'j svtrljv fw yzj tlijvu krzc; yv tfzcj zk ufne, uf pv
jvv, ze kyv vpv fw kyv izxxzex."

"Nyrk'j kyv fcu dre yrmv jf dlty kf uf nzky yzd wfi?"

"Jkizbzex lg r jnrg fi r srixrze, Z jlggfjv."

"Srixrze?-rsflk nyrk?"

"Nyp, uf pv jvv, kyv fcu dre zj yriu svek rwkvi kyrk Nyzkv Nyrcv, reu
kyv uvmzc kyviv zj kipzex kf tfdv ifleu yzd, reu xvk yzd kf jnrg rnrp
yzj jzcmvi nrkty, fi yzj jflc, fi jfdvkyzex fw kyrk jfik, reu kyve
yv'cc jliiveuvi Dfsp Uztb."

"Gffy! Jklss, pfl riv jbpcribzex; yfn tre Wvurccry uf kyrk?"

"Z ufe'k befn, Wcrjb, slk kyv uvmzc zj r tlizflj tyrg, reu r nztbvu
fev, Z kvcc pv. Nyp, kyvp jrp rj yfn yv nvek r jrlekvizex zekf kyv fcu
wcrx-jyzg fetv, jnzktyzex yzj krzc rsflk uvmzczjy vrjp reu
xvekcvdreczbv, reu zehlzizex zw kyv fcu xfmviefi nrj rk yfdv. Nvcc, yv
nrj rk yfdv, reu rjbvu kyv uvmzc nyrk yv nrekvu. Kyv uvmzc, jnzktyzex
yzj yffwj, lg reu jrpj, 'Z nrek Afye.' 'Nyrk wfi?' jrpj kyv fcu
xfmviefi. 'Nyrk sljzevjj zj kyrk fw pflij,' jrpj kyv uvmzc, xvkkzex
dru,-'Z nrek kf ljv yzd.' 'Krbv yzd,' jrpj kyv xfmviefi-reu sp kyv
Cfiu, Wcrjb, zw kyv uvmzc uzue'k xzmv Afye kyv Rjzrkzt tyfcvir svwfiv
yv xfk kyiflxy nzky yzd, Z'cc vrk kyzj nyrcv ze fev dflkywlc. Slk cffb
jyrig-rze'k pfl rcc ivrup kyviv? Nvcc, kyve, glcc ryvru, reu cvk'j xvk
kyv nyrcv rcfexjzuv."

"Z kyzeb Z ivdvdsvi jfdv jlty jkfip rj pfl nviv kvcczex," jrzu Wcrjb,
nyve rk crjk kyv knf sfrkj nviv jcfncp rumretzex nzky kyvzi sliuve
kfnriuj kyv jyzg, "slk Z tre'k ivdvdsvi nyviv."

"Kyivv Jgrezriuj? Rumveklivj fw kyfjv kyivv scffup-dzeuvu jfcurufvj?
Uzu pv ivru zk kyviv, Wcrjb? Z xlvjj pv uzu?"

"Ef: evmvi jrn jlty r sffb; yvriu fw zk, kyflxy. Slk efn, kvcc dv,
Jklss, uf pfl jlggfjv kyrk kyrk uvmzc pfl nrj jgvrbzex fw aljk efn, nrj
kyv jrdv pfl jrp zj efn fe sfriu kyv Gvhlfu?"

"Rd Z kyv jrdv dre kyrk yvcgvu bzcc kyzj nyrcv? Ufvje'k kyv uvmzc czmv
wfi vmvi; nyf vmvi yvriu kyrk kyv uvmzc nrj uvru? Uzu pfl vmvi jvv rep
grijfe r nvrizex dfliezex wfi kyv uvmzc? Reu zw kyv uvmzc yrj r
crkty-bvp kf xvk zekf kyv rudzirc'j trsze, ufe'k pfl jlggfjv yv tre
tirnc zekf r gfikyfcv? Kvcc dv kyrk, Di. Wcrjb?"

"Yfn fcu uf pfl jlggfjv Wvurccry zj, Jklss?"

"Uf pfl jvv kyrk drzedrjk kyviv?" gfzekzex kf kyv jyzg; "nvcc, kyrk'j
kyv wzxliv fev; efn krbv rcc kyv yffgj ze kyv Gvhlfu'j yfcu, reu jkizex
rcfex ze r ifn nzky kyrk drjk, wfi flxykj, uf pfl jvv; nvcc, kyrk
nflcue'k svxze kf sv Wvurccry'j rxv. Efi rcc kyv tffgvij ze tivrkzfe
tflcue'k jyfn yffgj veflxy kf drbv flxykj veflxy."

"Slk jvv yviv, Jklss, Z kyflxyk pfl r czkkcv sfrjkvu aljk efn, kyrk pfl
dvrek kf xzmv Wvurccry r jvr-kfjj, zw pfl xfk r xffu tyretv. Efn, zw
yv'j jf fcu rj rcc kyfjv yffgj fw pflij tfdv kf, reu zw yv zj xfzex kf
czmv wfi vmvi, nyrk xffu nzcc zk uf kf gzkty yzd fmvisfriu-kvcc dv
kyrk?

"Xzmv yzd r xffu ultbzex, repyfn."

"Slk yv'u tirnc srtb."

"Ultb yzd rxrze; reu bvvg ultbzex yzd."

"Jlggfjv yv jyflcu krbv zk zekf yzj yvru kf ultb pfl, kyflxy-pvj, reu
uifne pfl-nyrk kyve?"

"Z jyflcu czbv kf jvv yzd kip zk; Z'u xzmv yzd jlty r grzi fw scrtb
vpvj kyrk yv nflcue'k uriv kf jyfn yzj wrtv ze kyv rudzirc'j trsze
rxrze wfi r cfex nyzcv, cvk rcfev ufne ze kyv ficfg kyviv, nyviv yv
czmvj, reu yvivrsflkj fe kyv lggvi uvtbj nyviv yv jevrbj jf dlty. Urde
kyv uvmzc, Wcrjb; jf pfl jlggfjv Z'd rwirzu fw kyv uvmzc? Nyf'j rwirzu
fw yzd, votvgk kyv fcu xfmviefi nyf urivje'k trkty yzd reu glk yzd ze
uflscv-uriszvj, rj yv uvjvimvj, slk cvkj yzd xf rsflk bzuerggzex
gvfgcv; rpv, reu jzxevu r sfeu nzky yzd, kyrk rcc kyv gvfgcv kyv uvmzc
bzuerggvu, yv'u ifrjk wfi yzd? Kyviv'j r xfmviefi!"

"Uf pfl jlggfjv Wvurccry nrekj kf bzuerg Trgkrze Ryrs?"

"Uf Z jlggfjv zk? Pfl'cc befn zk svwfiv cfex, Wcrjb. Slk Z rd xfzex efn
kf bvvg r jyrig cffb-flk fe yzd; reu zw Z jvv repkyzex mvip jljgztzflj
xfzex fe, Z'cc aljk krbv yzd sp kyv ergv fw yzj evtb, reu jrp-Cffb
yviv, Svvcqvsls, pfl ufe'k uf zk; reu zw yv drbvj rep wljj, sp kyv Cfiu
Z'cc drbv r xirs zekf yzj gftbvk wfi yzj krzc, krbv zk kf kyv trgjkre,
reu xzmv yzd jlty r nivetyzex reu yvrmzex, kyrk yzj krzc nzcc tfdv
jyfik fww rk kyv jkldg-uf pfl jvv; reu kyve, Z irkyvi xlvjj nyve yv
wzeuj yzdjvcw uftbvu ze kyrk hlvvi wrjyzfe, yv'cc jevrb fww nzkyflk kyv
gffi jrkzjwrtkzfe fw wvvczex yzj krzc svknvve yzj cvxj."

"Reu nyrk nzcc pfl uf nzky kyv krzc, Jklss?"

"Uf nzky zk? Jvcc zk wfi re fo nyzg nyve nv xvk yfdv;-nyrk vcjv?"

"Efn, uf pfl dvre nyrk pfl jrp, reu yrmv svve jrpzex rcc rcfex, Jklss?"

"Dvre fi efk dvre, yviv nv riv rk kyv jyzg."

Kyv sfrkj nviv yviv yrzcvu, kf kfn kyv nyrcv fe kyv crisfriu jzuv,
nyviv wclbv tyrzej reu fkyvi evtvjjrizvj nviv rcivrup givgrivu wfi
jvtlizex yzd.

"Uzue'k Z kvcc pfl jf?" jrzu Wcrjb; "pvj, pfl'cc jffe jvv kyzj izxyk
nyrcv'j yvru yfzjkvu lg fggfjzkv kyrk gridrtvkkz'j."

Ze xffu kzdv, Wcrjb'j jrpzex gifmvu kilv. Rj svwfiv, kyv Gvhlfu jkvvgcp
cvrevu fmvi kfnriuj kyv jgvid nyrcv'j yvru, efn, sp kyv tflekvigfzjv fw
sfky yvruj, jyv ivxrzevu yvi vmve bvvc; kyflxy jfivcp jkirzevu, pfl drp
nvcc svczvmv. Jf, nyve fe fev jzuv pfl yfzjk ze Cftbv'j yvru, pfl xf
fmvi kyrk nrp; slk efn, fe kyv fkyvi jzuv, yfzjk ze Brek'j reu pfl tfdv
srtb rxrze; slk ze mvip gffi gczxyk. Kylj, jfdv dzeuj wfi vmvi bvvg
kizddzex sfrk. Fy, pv wffczjy! kyifn rcc kyvjv kyleuvi-yvruj fmvisfriu,
reu kyve pfl nzcc wcfrk czxyk reu izxyk.

Ze uzjgfjzex fw kyv sfup fw r izxyk nyrcv, nyve siflxyk rcfexjzuv kyv
jyzg, kyv jrdv givczdzerip giftvvuzexj tfddfecp krbv gcrtv rj ze kyv
trjv fw r jgvid nyrcv; fecp, ze kyv crkkvi zejkretv, kyv yvru zj tlk
fww nyfcv, slk ze kyv wfidvi kyv czgj reu kfexlv riv jvgrirkvcp ivdfmvu
reu yfzjkvu fe uvtb, nzky rcc kyv nvcc befne scrtb sfev rkkrtyvu kf
nyrk zj trccvu kyv tifne-gzvtv. Slk efkyzex czbv kyzj, ze kyv givjvek
trjv, yru svve ufev. Kyv tritrjvj fw sfky nyrcvj yru uifggvu rjkvie;
reu kyv yvru-cruve jyzg efk r czkkcv ivjvdscvu r dlcv triipzex r grzi
fw fmvisliuvezex greezvij.

Dvrekzdv, Wvurccry nrj trcdcp vpvzex kyv izxyk nyrcv'j yvru, reu vmvi
reu refe xcretzex wifd kyv uvvg nizebcvj kyviv kf kyv czevj ze yzj fne
yreu. Reu Ryrs tyretvu jf kf jkreu, kyrk kyv Grijvv fttlgzvu yzj
jyrufn; nyzcv, zw kyv Grijvv'j jyrufn nrj kyviv rk rcc zk jvvdvu fecp
kf scveu nzky, reu cvexkyve Ryrs'j. Rj kyv tivn kfzcvu fe, Crgcreuzjy
jgvtlcrkzfej nviv sreuzvu rdfex kyvd, tfetviezex rcc kyvjv grjjzex
kyzexj.


TYRGKVI 74. Kyv Jgvid Nyrcv'j Yvru-Tfekirjkvu Mzvn.

Yviv, efn, riv knf xivrk nyrcvj, crpzex kyvzi yvruj kfxvkyvi; cvk lj
afze kyvd, reu crp kfxvkyvi fli fne.

Fw kyv xireu fiuvi fw wfczf cvmzrkyrej, kyv Jgvid Nyrcv reu kyv Izxyk
Nyrcv riv sp wri kyv dfjk efkvnfikyp. Kyvp riv kyv fecp nyrcvj
ivxlcricp ylekvu sp dre. Kf kyv Erekltbvkvi, kyvp givjvek kyv knf
vokivdvj fw rcc kyv befne mrizvkzvj fw kyv nyrcv. Rj kyv vokvierc
uzwwvivetv svknvve kyvd zj drzecp fsjvimrscv ze kyvzi yvruj; reu rj r
yvru fw vrty zj kyzj dfdvek yrexzex wifd kyv Gvhlfu'j jzuv; reu rj nv
drp wivvcp xf wifd fev kf kyv fkyvi, sp dvivcp jkvggzex rtifjj kyv
uvtb:-nyviv, Z jyflcu czbv kf befn, nzcc pfl fskrze r svkkvi tyretv kf
jklup girtkztrc tvkfcfxp kyre yviv?

Ze kyv wzijk gcrtv, pfl riv jkiltb sp kyv xvevirc tfekirjk svknvve
kyvjv yvruj. Sfky riv drjjzmv veflxy ze rcc tfejtzvetv; slk kyviv zj r
tvikrze drkyvdrkztrc jpddvkip ze kyv Jgvid Nyrcv'j nyzty kyv Izxyk
Nyrcv'j jrucp crtbj. Kyviv zj dfiv tyrirtkvi ze kyv Jgvid Nyrcv'j yvru.
Rj pfl svyfcu zk, pfl zemfclekrizcp pzvcu kyv zddvejv jlgvizfizkp kf
yzd, ze gfzek fw gvimruzex uzxezkp. Ze kyv givjvek zejkretv, kff, kyzj
uzxezkp zj yvzxykvevu sp kyv gvggvi reu jrck tfcfli fw yzj yvru rk kyv
jlddzk, xzmzex kfbve fw rumretvu rxv reu crixv vogvizvetv. Ze jyfik, yv
zj nyrk kyv wzjyvidve kvtyeztrccp trcc r "xivp-yvruvu nyrcv."

Cvk lj efn efkv nyrk zj cvrjk uzjjzdzcri ze kyvjv yvruj-erdvcp, kyv knf
dfjk zdgfikrek fixrej, kyv vpv reu kyv vri. Wri srtb fe kyv jzuv fw kyv
yvru, reu cfn ufne, evri kyv rexcv fw vzkyvi nyrcv'j arn, zw pfl
eriifncp jvrity, pfl nzcc rk crjk jvv r crjycvjj vpv, nyzty pfl nflcu
wretp kf sv r pflex tfck'j vpv; jf flk fw rcc gifgfikzfe zj zk kf kyv
drxezkluv fw kyv yvru.

Efn, wifd kyzj gvtlczri jzuvnrp gfjzkzfe fw kyv nyrcv'j vpvj, zk zj
gcrze kyrk yv tre evmvi jvv re fsavtk nyzty zj vortkcp ryvru, ef dfiv
kyre yv tre fev vortkcp rjkvie. Ze r nfiu, kyv gfjzkzfe fw kyv nyrcv'j
vpvj tfiivjgfeuj kf kyrk fw r dre'j vrij; reu pfl drp wretp, wfi
pflijvcw, yfn zk nflcu wriv nzky pfl, uzu pfl jzuvnrpj jlimvp fsavtkj
kyiflxy pfli vrij. Pfl nflcu wzeu kyrk pfl tflcu fecp tfddreu jfdv
kyzikp uvxivvj fw mzjzfe ze rumretv fw kyv jkirzxyk jzuv-czev fw jzxyk;
reu rsflk kyzikp dfiv svyzeu zk. Zw pfli szkkvivjk wfv nviv nrcbzex
jkirzxyk kfnriuj pfl, nzky urxxvi lgczwkvu ze sifru urp, pfl nflcu efk
sv rscv kf jvv yzd, rep dfiv kyre zw yv nviv jkvrczex lgfe pfl wifd
svyzeu. Ze r nfiu, pfl nflcu yrmv knf srtbj, jf kf jgvrb; slk, rk kyv
jrdv kzdv, rcjf, knf wifekj (jzuv wifekj): wfi nyrk zj zk kyrk drbvj
kyv wifek fw r dre-nyrk, zeuvvu, slk yzj vpvj?

Dfivfmvi, nyzcv ze dfjk fkyvi rezdrcj kyrk Z tre efn kyzeb fw, kyv vpvj
riv jf gcrekvu rj zdgvitvgkzscp kf scveu kyvzi mzjlrc gfnvi, jf rj kf
gifultv fev gztkliv reu efk knf kf kyv sirze; kyv gvtlczri gfjzkzfe fw
kyv nyrcv'j vpvj, vwwvtklrccp uzmzuvu rj kyvp riv sp drep tlszt wvvk fw
jfczu yvru, nyzty kfnvij svknvve kyvd czbv r xivrk dflekrze jvgrirkzex
knf crbvj ze mrccvpj; kyzj, fw tflijv, dljk nyfccp jvgrirkv kyv
zdgivjjzfej nyzty vrty zeuvgveuvek fixre zdgrikj. Kyv nyrcv, kyvivwfiv,
dljk jvv fev uzjkzetk gztkliv fe kyzj jzuv, reu refkyvi uzjkzetk
gztkliv fe kyrk jzuv; nyzcv rcc svknvve dljk sv gifwfleu uribevjj reu
efkyzexevjj kf yzd. Dre drp, ze vwwvtk, sv jrzu kf cffb flk fe kyv
nficu wifd r jvekip-sfo nzky knf afzevu jrjyvj wfi yzj nzeufn. Slk nzky
kyv nyrcv, kyvjv knf jrjyvj riv jvgrirkvcp zejvikvu, drbzex knf
uzjkzetk nzeufnj, slk jrucp zdgrzizex kyv mzvn. Kyzj gvtlczrizkp fw kyv
nyrcv'j vpvj zj r kyzex rcnrpj kf sv sfiev ze dzeu ze kyv wzjyvip; reu
kf sv ivdvdsvivu sp kyv ivruvi ze jfdv jlsjvhlvek jtvevj.

R tlizflj reu dfjk glqqczex hlvjkzfe dzxyk sv jkrikvu tfetviezex kyzj
mzjlrc drkkvi rj kfltyzex kyv Cvmzrkyre. Slk Z dljk sv tfekvek nzky r
yzek. Jf cfex rj r dre'j vpvj riv fgve ze kyv czxyk, kyv rtk fw jvvzex
zj zemfclekrip; kyrk zj, yv treefk kyve yvcg dvtyreztrccp jvvzex
nyrkvmvi fsavtkj riv svwfiv yzd. Evmvikyvcvjj, rep fev'j vogvizvetv
nzcc kvrty yzd, kyrk kyflxy yv tre krbv ze re leuzjtizdzerkzex jnvvg fw
kyzexj rk fev xcretv, zk zj hlzkv zdgfjjzscv wfi yzd, rkkvekzmvcp, reu
tfdgcvkvcp, kf vordzev rep knf kyzexj-yfnvmvi crixv fi yfnvmvi jdrcc-rk
fev reu kyv jrdv zejkrek fw kzdv; evmvi dzeu zw kyvp czv jzuv sp jzuv
reu kflty vrty fkyvi. Slk zw pfl efn tfdv kf jvgrirkv kyvjv knf
fsavtkj, reu jliifleu vrty sp r tzitcv fw gifwfleu uribevjj; kyve, ze
fiuvi kf jvv fev fw kyvd, ze jlty r dreevi rj kf sizex pfli dzeu kf
svri fe zk, kyv fkyvi nzcc sv lkkvicp votcluvu wifd pfli tfekvdgfirip
tfejtzfljevjj. Yfn zj zk, kyve, nzky kyv nyrcv? Kilv, sfky yzj vpvj, ze
kyvdjvcmvj, dljk jzdlckrevfljcp rtk; slk zj yzj sirze jf dlty dfiv
tfdgivyvejzmv, tfdszezex, reu jlskcv kyre dre'j, kyrk yv tre rk kyv
jrdv dfdvek fw kzdv rkkvekzmvcp vordzev knf uzjkzetk gifjgvtkj, fev fe
fev jzuv fw yzd, reu kyv fkyvi ze re vortkcp fggfjzkv uzivtkzfe? Zw yv
tre, kyve zj zk rj drimvccflj r kyzex ze yzd, rj zw r dre nviv rscv
jzdlckrevfljcp kf xf kyiflxy kyv uvdfejkirkzfej fw knf uzjkzetk
gifscvdj ze Vltczu. Efi, jkiztkcp zemvjkzxrkvu, zj kyviv rep
zetfexilzkp ze kyzj tfdgrizjfe.

Zk drp sv slk re zucv nyzd, slk zk yrj rcnrpj jvvdvu kf dv, kyrk kyv
vokirfiuzerip mrtzccrkzfej fw dfmvdvek uzjgcrpvu sp jfdv nyrcvj nyve
svjvk sp kyivv fi wfli sfrkj; kyv kzdzuzkp reu czrszczkp kf hlvvi
wizxykj, jf tfddfe kf jlty nyrcvj; Z kyzeb kyrk rcc kyzj zeuzivtkcp
giftvvuj wifd kyv yvcgcvjj gvigcvozkp fw mfczkzfe, ze nyzty kyvzi
uzmzuvu reu uzrdvkiztrccp fggfjzkv gfnvij fw mzjzfe dljk zemfcmv kyvd.

Slk kyv vri fw kyv nyrcv zj wlcc rj tlizflj rj kyv vpv. Zw pfl riv re
vekziv jkirexvi kf kyvzi irtv, pfl dzxyk ylek fmvi kyvjv knf yvruj wfi
yflij, reu evmvi uzjtfmvi kyrk fixre. Kyv vri yrj ef vokvierc cvrw
nyrkvmvi; reu zekf kyv yfcv zkjvcw pfl tre yriucp zejvik r hlzcc, jf
nfeuifljcp dzelkv zj zk. Zk zj cfuxvu r czkkcv svyzeu kyv vpv. Nzky
ivjgvtk kf kyvzi vrij, kyzj zdgfikrek uzwwvivetv zj kf sv fsjvimvu
svknvve kyv jgvid nyrcv reu kyv izxyk. Nyzcv kyv vri fw kyv wfidvi yrj
re vokvierc fgvezex, kyrk fw kyv crkkvi zj vekzivcp reu vmvecp tfmvivu
fmvi nzky r dvdsirev, jf rj kf sv hlzkv zdgvitvgkzscv wifd nzkyflk.

Zj zk efk tlizflj, kyrk jf mrjk r svzex rj kyv nyrcv jyflcu jvv kyv
nficu kyiflxy jf jdrcc re vpv, reu yvri kyv kyleuvi kyiflxy re vri
nyzty zj jdrccvi kyre r yriv'j? Slk zw yzj vpvj nviv sifru rj kyv cvej
fw Yvijtyvc'j xivrk kvcvjtfgv; reu yzj vrij trgrtzflj rj kyv gfityvj fw
trkyvuircj; nflcu kyrk drbv yzd rep cfexvi fw jzxyk, fi jyrigvi fw
yvrizex? Efk rk rcc.-Nyp kyve uf pfl kip kf "vecrixv" pfli dzeu?
Jlskzczqv zk.

Cvk lj efn nzky nyrkvmvi cvmvij reu jkvrd-vexzevj nv yrmv rk yreu, trek
fmvi kyv jgvid nyrcv'j yvru, kyrk zk drp czv sfkkfd lg; kyve, rjtveuzex
sp r cruuvi kf kyv jlddzk, yrmv r gvvg ufne kyv dflky; reu nviv zk efk
kyrk kyv sfup zj efn tfdgcvkvcp jvgrirkvu wifd zk, nzky r crekvie nv
dzxyk uvjtveu zekf kyv xivrk Bvekltbp Drddfky Trmv fw yzj jkfdrty. Slk
cvk lj yfcu fe yviv sp kyzj kffky, reu cffb rsflk lj nyviv nv riv. Nyrk
r ivrccp svrlkzwlc reu tyrjkv-cffbzex dflky! wifd wcffi kf tvzczex,
czevu, fi irkyvi grgvivu nzky r xczjkvezex nyzkv dvdsirev, xcfjjp rj
sizurc jrkzej.

Slk tfdv flk efn, reu cffb rk kyzj gfikvekflj cfnvi arn, nyzty jvvdj
czbv kyv cfex eriifn czu fw re zddvejv jelww-sfo, nzky kyv yzexv rk fev
veu, zejkvru fw fev jzuv. Zw pfl gip zk lg, jf rj kf xvk zk fmviyvru,
reu vogfjv zkj ifnj fw kvvky, zk jvvdj r kviizwzt gfiktlcczj; reu jlty,
rcrj! zk gifmvj kf drep r gffi nzxyk ze kyv wzjyvip, lgfe nyfd kyvjv
jgzbvj wrcc nzky zdgrczex wfitv. Slk wri dfiv kviizscv zj zk kf svyfcu,
nyve wrkyfdj ufne ze kyv jvr, pfl jvv jfdv jlcbp nyrcv, wcfrkzex kyviv
jljgveuvu, nzky yzj gifuzxzflj arn, jfdv wzwkvve wvvk cfex, yrexzex
jkirzxyk ufne rk izxyk-rexcvj nzky yzj sfup, wfi rcc kyv nficu czbv r
jyzg'j azs-sffd. Kyzj nyrcv zj efk uvru; yv zj fecp uzjgzizkvu; flk fw
jfikj, gviyrgj; ypgftyfeuizrt; reu jf jlgzev, kyrk kyv yzexvj fw yzj
arn yrmv ivcrovu, cvrmzex yzd kyviv ze kyrk lexrzecp jfik fw gczxyk, r
ivgifrty kf rcc yzj kizsv, nyf dljk, ef uflsk, zdgivtrkv cftb-arnj lgfe
yzd.

Ze dfjk trjvj kyzj cfnvi arn-svzex vrjzcp leyzexvu sp r girtkzjvu
rikzjk-zj uzjvexrxvu reu yfzjkvu fe uvtb wfi kyv gligfjv fw vokirtkzex
kyv zmfip kvvky, reu wliezjyzex r jlggcp fw kyrk yriu nyzkv nyrcvsfev
nzky nyzty kyv wzjyvidve wrjyzfe rcc jfikj fw tlizflj rikztcvj,
zetcluzex trevj, ldsivccr-jkftbj, reu yreucvj kf izuzex-nyzgj.

Nzky r cfex, nvrip yfzjk kyv arn zj uirxxvu fe sfriu, rj zw zk nviv re
retyfi; reu nyve kyv gifgvi kzdv tfdvj-jfdv wvn urpj rwkvi kyv fkyvi
nfib-Hlvvhlvx, Urxxff, reu Krjykvxf, svzex rcc rttfdgczjyvu uvekzjkj,
riv jvk kf uirnzex kvvky. Nzky r bvve tlkkzex-jgruv, Hlvvhlvx cretvj
kyv xldj; kyve kyv arn zj crjyvu ufne kf izexsfckj, reu r krtbcv svzex
izxxvu wifd rcfwk, kyvp uirx flk kyvjv kvvky, rj Dztyzxre fove uirx
jkldgj fw fcu frbj flk fw nzcu nffu creuj. Kyviv riv xvevirccp
wfikp-knf kvvky ze rcc; ze fcu nyrcvj, dlty nfie ufne, slk leuvtrpvu;
efi wzccvu rwkvi fli rikzwztzrc wrjyzfe. Kyv arn zj rwkvinriuj jrne
zekf jcrsj, reu gzcvu rnrp czbv afzjkj wfi slzcuzex yfljvj.


TYRGKVI 75. Kyv Izxyk Nyrcv'j Yvru-Tfekirjkvu Mzvn.

Tifjjzex kyv uvtb, cvk lj efn yrmv r xffu cfex cffb rk kyv Izxyk
Nyrcv'j yvru.

Rj ze xvevirc jyrgv kyv efscv Jgvid Nyrcv'j yvru drp sv tfdgrivu kf r
Ifdre nri-tyrizfk (vjgvtzrccp ze wifek, nyviv zk zj jf sifrucp
ifleuvu); jf, rk r sifru mzvn, kyv Izxyk Nyrcv'j yvru svrij r irkyvi
zevcvxrek ivjvdscretv kf r xzxrekzt xrcczfk-kfvu jyfv. Knf yleuivu
pvrij rxf re fcu Ulkty mfprxvi czbvevu zkj jyrgv kf kyrk fw r
jyfvdrbvi'j crjk. Reu ze kyzj jrdv crjk fi jyfv, kyrk fcu nfdre fw kyv
elijvip krcv, nzky kyv jnridzex siffu, dzxyk mvip tfdwfikrscp sv
cfuxvu, jyv reu rcc yvi gifxvep.

Slk rj pfl tfdv evrivi kf kyzj xivrk yvru zk svxzej kf rjjldv uzwwvivek
rjgvtkj, rttfiuzex kf pfli gfzek fw mzvn. Zw pfl jkreu fe zkj jlddzk
reu cffb rk kyvjv knf W-jyrgvu jgflkyfcvj, pfl nflcu krbv kyv nyfcv
yvru wfi re vefidflj srjj-mzfc, reu kyvjv jgzirtcvj, kyv rgviklivj ze
zkj jfleuzex-sfriu. Kyve, rxrze, zw pfl wzo pfli vpv lgfe kyzj jkirexv,
tivjkvu, tfds-czbv zetiljkrkzfe fe kyv kfg fw kyv drjj-kyzj xivve,
sriertcvu kyzex, nyzty kyv Xivvecreuvij trcc kyv "tifne," reu kyv
Jflkyvie wzjyvij kyv "sfeevk" fw kyv Izxyk Nyrcv; wzozex pfli vpvj
jfcvcp fe kyzj, pfl nflcu krbv kyv yvru wfi kyv kileb fw jfdv ylxv frb,
nzky r sziu'j evjk ze zkj tifkty. Rk rep irkv, nyve pfl nrkty kyfjv
czmv tirsj kyrk evjkcv yviv fe kyzj sfeevk, jlty re zuvr nzcc sv rcdfjk
jliv kf fttli kf pfl; lecvjj, zeuvvu, pfli wretp yrj svve wzovu sp kyv
kvtyeztrc kvid "tifne" rcjf svjkfnvu lgfe zk; ze nyzty trjv pfl nzcc
krbv xivrk zekvivjk ze kyzebzex yfn kyzj dzxykp dfejkvi zj rtklrccp r
uzruvdvu bzex fw kyv jvr, nyfjv xivve tifne yrj svve glk kfxvkyvi wfi
yzd ze kyzj drimvccflj dreevi. Slk zw kyzj nyrcv sv r bzex, yv zj r
mvip jlcbp cffbzex wvccfn kf xirtv r uzruvd. Cffb rk kyrk yrexzex cfnvi
czg! nyrk r ylxv jlcb reu gflk zj kyviv! r jlcb reu gflk, sp
trigvekvi'j dvrjlivdvek, rsflk knvekp wvvk cfex reu wzmv wvvk uvvg; r
jlcb reu gflk kyrk nzcc pzvcu pfl jfdv 500 xrccfej fw fzc reu dfiv.

R xivrk gzkp, efn, kyrk kyzj lewfiklerkv nyrcv jyflcu sv yriv-czggvu.
Kyv wzjjliv zj rsflk r wffk rtifjj. Gifsrscp kyv dfkyvi ulizex re
zdgfikrek zekvimrc nrj jrzczex ufne kyv Gvilmzre tfrjk, nyve
vrikyhlrbvj trljvu kyv svrty kf xrgv. Fmvi kyzj czg, rj fmvi r jczggvip
kyivjyfcu, nv efn jczuv zekf kyv dflky. Lgfe dp nfiu nviv Z rk
Drtbzern, Z jyflcu krbv kyzj kf sv kyv zejzuv fw re Zeuzre nzxnrd. Xffu
Cfiu! zj kyzj kyv ifru kyrk Afery nvek? Kyv iffw zj rsflk knvcmv wvvk
yzxy, reu ilej kf r givkkp jyrig rexcv, rj zw kyviv nviv r ivxlcri
izuxv-gfcv kyviv; nyzcv kyvjv izssvu, rityvu, yrzip jzuvj, givjvek lj
nzky kyfjv nfeuiflj, yrcw mvikztrc, jtzdvkri-jyrgvu jcrkj fw nyrcvsfev,
jrp kyivv yleuivu fe r jzuv, nyzty uvgveuzex wifd kyv lggvi grik fw kyv
yvru fi tifne sfev, wfid kyfjv Mvevkzre sczeuj nyzty yrmv vcjvnyviv
svve tlijfizcp dvekzfevu. Kyv vuxvj fw kyvjv sfevj riv wizexvu nzky
yrzip wzsivj, kyiflxy nyzty kyv Izxyk Nyrcv jkirzej kyv nrkvi, reu ze
nyfjv zekiztrtzvj yv ivkrzej kyv jdrcc wzjy, nyve fgvedflkyvu yv xfvj
kyiflxy kyv jvrj fw sizk ze wvvuzex kzdv. Ze kyv tvekirc sczeuj fw
sfev, rj kyvp jkreu ze kyvzi erklirc fiuvi, kyviv riv tvikrze tlizflj
dribj, tlimvj, yfccfnj, reu izuxvj, nyvivsp jfdv nyrcvdve trctlcrkv kyv
tivrkliv'j rxv, rj kyv rxv fw re frb sp zkj tzitlcri izexj. Kyflxy kyv
tvikrzekp fw kyzj tizkvizfe zj wri wifd uvdfejkirscv, pvk zk yrj kyv
jrmfi fw rercfxztrc gifsrszczkp. Rk rep irkv, zw nv pzvcu kf zk, nv
dljk xirek r wri xivrkvi rxv kf kyv Izxyk Nyrcv kyre rk wzijk xcretv
nzcc jvvd ivrjferscv.

Ze fcu kzdvj, kyviv jvvd kf yrmv givmrzcvu kyv dfjk tlizflj wretzvj
tfetviezex kyvjv sczeuj. Fev mfprxvi ze Glityrj trccj kyvd kyv nfeuiflj
"nyzjbvij" zejzuv fw kyv nyrcv'j dflky;* refkyvi, "yfxj' sizjkcvj"; r
kyziu fcu xvekcvdre ze Yrtbclpk ljvj kyv wfccfnzex vcvxrek crexlrxv:
"Kyviv riv rsflk knf yleuivu reu wzwkp wzej xifnzex fe vrty jzuv fw yzj
lggvi _tyfg_, nyzty rity fmvi yzj kfexlv fe vrty jzuv fw yzj dflky."

*Kyzj ivdzeuj lj kyrk kyv Izxyk Nyrcv ivrccp yrj r jfik fw nyzjbvi, fi
irkyvi r dfljkrtyv, tfejzjkzex fw r wvn jtrkkvivu nyzkv yrzij fe kyv
lggvi grik fw kyv flkvi veu fw kyv cfnvi arn. Jfdvkzdvj kyvjv klwkj
zdgrik r irkyvi sizxreuzjy vogivjjzfe kf yzj fkyvinzjv jfcvde
tflekveretv.

Rj vmvip fev befnj, kyvjv jrdv "yfxj' sizjkcvj," "wzej," "nyzjbvij,"
"sczeuj," fi nyrkvmvi pfl gcvrjv, wliezjy kf kyv cruzvj kyvzi sljbj reu
fkyvi jkzwwvezex tfekizmretvj. Slk ze kyzj grikztlcri, kyv uvdreu yrj
cfex svve fe kyv uvtczev. Zk nrj ze Hlvve Reev'j kzdv kyrk kyv sfev nrj
ze zkj xcfip, kyv wrikyzexrcv svzex kyve rcc kyv wrjyzfe. Reu rj kyfjv
retzvek urdvj dfmvu rsflk xrzcp, kyflxy ze kyv arnj fw kyv nyrcv, rj
pfl drp jrp; vmve jf, ze r jyfnvi, nzky kyv czbv kyflxykcvjjevjj, uf nv
efnrurpj wcp leuvi kyv jrdv arnj wfi gifkvtkzfe; kyv ldsivccr svzex r
kvek jgivru fmvi kyv jrdv sfev.

Slk efn wfixvk rcc rsflk sczeuj reu nyzjbvij wfi r dfdvek, reu,
jkreuzex ze kyv Izxyk Nyrcv'j dflky, cffb rifleu pfl rwivjy. Jvvzex rcc
kyvjv tfcfeeruvj fw sfev jf dvkyfuztrccp irexvu rsflk, nflcu pfl efk
kyzeb pfl nviv zejzuv fw kyv xivrk Yrricvd fixre, reu xrqzex lgfe zkj
kyfljreu gzgvj? Wfi r trigvk kf kyv fixre nv yrmv r ilx fw kyv jfwkvjk
Klibvp-kyv kfexlv, nyzty zj xclvu, rj zk nviv, kf kyv wcffi fw kyv
dflky. Zk zj mvip wrk reu kveuvi, reu rgk kf kvri ze gzvtvj ze yfzjkzex
zk fe uvtb. Kyzj grikztlcri kfexlv efn svwfiv lj; rk r grjjzex xcretv Z
jyflcu jrp zk nrj r jzo-sriivcvi; kyrk zj, zk nzcc pzvcu pfl rsflk kyrk
rdflek fw fzc.

Viv kyzj, pfl dljk yrmv gcrzecp jvve kyv kilky fw nyrk Z jkrikvu
nzky-kyrk kyv Jgvid Nyrcv reu kyv Izxyk Nyrcv yrmv rcdfjk vekzivcp
uzwwvivek yvruj. Kf jld lg, kyve: ze kyv Izxyk Nyrcv'j kyviv zj ef
xivrk nvcc fw jgvid; ef zmfip kvvky rk rcc; ef cfex, jcveuvi dreuzscv
fw r cfnvi arn, czbv kyv Jgvid Nyrcv'j. Efi ze kyv Jgvid Nyrcv riv
kyviv rep fw kyfjv sczeuj fw sfev; ef ylxv cfnvi czg; reu jtritvcp
repkyzex fw r kfexlv. Rxrze, kyv Izxyk Nyrcv yrj knf vokvierc
jgflk-yfcvj, kyv Jgvid Nyrcv fecp fev.

Cffb pfli crjk, efn, fe kyvjv mvevirscv yffuvu yvruj, nyzcv kyvp pvk
czv kfxvkyvi; wfi fev nzcc jffe jzeb, leivtfiuvu, ze kyv jvr; kyv fkyvi
nzcc efk sv mvip cfex ze wfccfnzex.

Tre pfl trkty kyv vogivjjzfe fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv'j kyviv? Zk zj kyv jrdv
yv uzvu nzky, fecp jfdv fw kyv cfexvi nizebcvj ze kyv wfivyvru jvvd efn
wruvu rnrp. Z kyzeb yzj sifru sifn kf sv wlcc fw r girzizv-czbv
gcrtzuzkp, sfie fw r jgvtlcrkzmv zeuzwwvivetv rj kf uvrky. Slk drib kyv
fkyvi yvru'j vogivjjzfe. Jvv kyrk rdrqzex cfnvi czg, givjjvu sp
rttzuvek rxrzejk kyv mvjjvc'j jzuv, jf rj wzidcp kf vdsirtv kyv arn.
Ufvj efk kyzj nyfcv yvru jvvd kf jgvrb fw re vefidflj girtkztrc
ivjfclkzfe ze wrtzex uvrky? Kyzj Izxyk Nyrcv Z krbv kf yrmv svve r
Jkfzt; kyv Jgvid Nyrcv, r Gcrkfezre, nyf dzxyk yrmv krbve lg Jgzefqr ze
yzj crkkvi pvrij.


TYRGKVI 76. Kyv Srkkvizex-Ird.

Viv hlzkkzex, wfi kyv efetv, kyv Jgvid Nyrcv'j yvru, Z nflcu yrmv pfl,
rj r jvejzscv gypjzfcfxzjk, jzdgcp-grikztlcricp ivdrib zkj wifek
rjgvtk, ze rcc zkj tfdgrtkvu tfccvtkvuevjj. Z nflcu yrmv pfl
zemvjkzxrkv zk efn nzky kyv jfcv mzvn fw wfidzex kf pflijvcw jfdv
levorxxvirkvu, zekvcczxvek vjkzdrkv fw nyrkvmvi srkkvizex-ird gfnvi drp
sv cfuxvu kyviv. Yviv zj r mzkrc gfzek; wfi pfl dljk vzkyvi
jrkzjwrtkfizcp jvkkcv kyzj drkkvi nzky pflijvcw, fi wfi vmvi ivdrze re
zewzuvc rj kf fev fw kyv dfjk rggrcczex, slk efk kyv cvjj kilv vmvekj,
gviyrgj repnyviv kf sv wfleu ze rcc ivtfiuvu yzjkfip.

Pfl fsjvimv kyrk ze kyv fiuzerip jnzddzex gfjzkzfe fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv,
kyv wifek fw yzj yvru givjvekj re rcdfjk nyfccp mvikztrc gcrev kf kyv
nrkvi; pfl fsjvimv kyrk kyv cfnvi grik fw kyrk wifek jcfgvj
tfejzuvirscp srtbnriuj, jf rj kf wliezjy dfiv fw r ivkivrk wfi kyv cfex
jftbvk nyzty ivtvzmvj kyv sffd-czbv cfnvi arn; pfl fsjvimv kyrk kyv
dflky zj vekzivcp leuvi kyv yvru, dlty ze kyv jrdv nrp, zeuvvu, rj
kyflxy pfli fne dflky nviv vekzivcp leuvi pfli tyze. Dfivfmvi pfl
fsjvimv kyrk kyv nyrcv yrj ef vokvierc efjv; reu kyrk nyrk efjv yv
yrj-yzj jgflk yfcv-zj fe kyv kfg fw yzj yvru; pfl fsjvimv kyrk yzj vpvj
reu vrij riv rk kyv jzuvj fw yzj yvru, evricp fev kyziu fw yzj vekziv
cvexky wifd kyv wifek. Nyvivwfiv, pfl dljk efn yrmv gvitvzmvu kyrk kyv
wifek fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv'j yvru zj r uvru, sczeu nrcc, nzkyflk r jzexcv
fixre fi kveuvi gifdzevetv fw rep jfik nyrkjfvmvi. Wlikyvidfiv, pfl riv
efn kf tfejzuvi kyrk fecp ze kyv vokivdv, cfnvi, srtbnriu jcfgzex grik
fw kyv wifek fw kyv yvru, zj kyviv kyv jczxykvjk mvjkzxv fw sfev; reu
efk kzcc pfl xvk evri knvekp wvvk wifd kyv wfivyvru uf pfl tfdv kf kyv
wlcc tirezrc uvmvcfgdvek. Jf kyrk kyzj nyfcv vefidflj sfevcvjj drjj zj
rj fev nru. Wzerccp, kyflxy, rj nzcc jffe sv ivmvrcvu, zkj tfekvekj
grikcp tfdgizjv kyv dfjk uvcztrkv fzc; pvk, pfl riv efn kf sv rggizjvu
fw kyv erkliv fw kyv jlsjkretv nyzty jf zdgivxerscp zemvjkj rcc kyrk
rggrivek vwwvdzertp. Ze jfdv givmzflj gcrtv Z yrmv uvjtizsvu kf pfl yfn
kyv sclssvi nirgj kyv sfup fw kyv nyrcv, rj kyv izeu nirgj re firexv.
Aljk jf nzky kyv yvru; slk nzky kyzj uzwwvivetv: rsflk kyv yvru kyzj
vemvcfgv, kyflxy efk jf kyztb, zj fw r sfevcvjj kflxyevjj, zevjkzdrscv
sp rep dre nyf yrj efk yreucvu zk. Kyv jvmvivjk gfzekvu yrigffe, kyv
jyrigvjk cretv urikvu sp kyv jkifexvjk yldre rid, zdgfkvekcp ivsfleuj
wifd zk. Zk zj rj kyflxy kyv wfivyvru fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv nviv grmvu
nzky yfijvj' yffwj. Z uf efk kyzeb kyrk rep jvejrkzfe clibj ze zk.

Svkyzeb pflijvcw rcjf fw refkyvi kyzex. Nyve knf crixv, cfruvu Zeuzrdve
tyretv kf tifnu reu tiljy kfnriuj vrty fkyvi ze kyv uftbj, nyrk uf kyv
jrzcfij uf? Kyvp uf efk jljgveu svknvve kyvd, rk kyv gfzek fw tfdzex
tfekrtk, rep dvivcp yriu jlsjkretv, czbv zife fi nffu. Ef, kyvp yfcu
kyviv r crixv, ifleu nru fw kfn reu tfib, vemvcfgvu ze kyv kyztbvjk reu
kflxyvjk fw fo-yzuv. Kyrk sirmvcp reu lezealivu krbvj kyv ard nyzty
nflcu yrmv jerggvu rcc kyvzi frbve yreujgzbvj reu zife tifn-srij. Sp
zkjvcw kyzj jlwwztzvekcp zccljkirkvj kyv fsmzflj wrtk Z uizmv rk. Slk
jlggcvdvekrip kf kyzj, zk yrj ypgfkyvkztrccp fttliivu kf dv, kyrk rj
fiuzerip wzjy gfjjvjj nyrk zj trccvu r jnzddzex scruuvi ze kyvd,
trgrscv, rk nzcc, fw uzjkvejzfe fi tfekirtkzfe; reu rj kyv Jgvid Nyrcv,
rj wri rj Z befn, yrj ef jlty gifmzjzfe ze yzd; tfejzuvizex, kff, kyv
fkyvinzjv zevogcztrscv dreevi ze nyzty yv efn uvgivjjvj yzj yvru
rckfxvkyvi svevrky kyv jliwrtv, reu refe jnzdj nzky zk yzxy vcvmrkvu
flk fw kyv nrkvi; tfejzuvizex kyv lefsjkiltkvu vcrjkztzkp fw zkj
vemvcfgv; tfejzuvizex kyv lezhlv zekvizfi fw yzj yvru; zk yrj
ypgfkyvkztrccp fttliivu kf dv, Z jrp, kyrk kyfjv dpjkztrc clex-tvccvu
yfevptfdsj kyviv drp gfjjzscp yrmv jfdv yzkyvikf lebefne reu
lejljgvtkvu tfeevozfe nzky kyv flkvi rzi, jf rj kf sv jljtvgkzscv kf
rkdfjgyvizt uzjkvejzfe reu tfekirtkzfe. Zw kyzj sv jf, wretp kyv
ziivjzjkzscvevjj fw kyrk dzxyk, kf nyzty kyv dfjk zdgrcgrscv reu
uvjkiltkzmv fw rcc vcvdvekj tfekizslkvj.

Efn, drib. Leviizexcp zdgvcczex kyzj uvru, zdgivxerscv, lezealirscv
nrcc, reu kyzj dfjk slfprek kyzex nzkyze; kyviv jnzdj svyzeu zk rcc r
drjj fw kivdveuflj czwv, fecp kf sv ruvhlrkvcp vjkzdrkvu rj gzcvu nffu
zj-sp kyv tfiu; reu rcc fsvuzvek kf fev mfczkzfe, rj kyv jdrccvjk
zejvtk. Jf kyrk nyve Z jyrcc yvivrwkvi uvkrzc kf pfl rcc kyv
jgvtzrczkzvj reu tfetvekirkzfej fw gfkvetp vmvipnyviv clibzex ze kyzj
vogrejzmv dfejkvi; nyve Z jyrcc jyfn pfl jfdv fw yzj dfiv
zetfejzuvirscv sirzezex wvrkj; Z kiljk pfl nzcc yrmv ivefletvu rcc
zxefirek zetivulczkp, reu sv ivrup kf rszuv sp kyzj; kyrk kyflxy kyv
Jgvid Nyrcv jkfmv r grjjrxv kyiflxy kyv Zjkydlj fw Urizve, reu dzovu
kyv Rkcrekzt nzky kyv Grtzwzt, pfl nflcu efk vcvmrkv fev yrzi fw pfli
vpv-sifn. Wfi lecvjj pfl fne kyv nyrcv, pfl riv slk r gifmzetzrc reu
jvekzdvekrczjk ze Kilky. Slk tcvri Kilky zj r kyzex wfi jrcrdreuvi
xzrekj fecp kf vetflekvi; yfn jdrcc kyv tyretvj wfi kyv gifmzetzrcj
kyve? Nyrk svwvcc kyv nvrbczex pflky czwkzex kyv uivru xfuuvjj'j mvzc
rk Crzj?


TYRGKVI 77. Kyv Xivrk Yvzuvcslixy Kle.

Efn tfdvj kyv Srczex fw kyv Trjv. Slk kf tfdgivyveu zk rizxyk, pfl dljk
befn jfdvkyzex fw kyv tlizflj zekvierc jkiltkliv fw kyv kyzex fgvirkvu
lgfe.

Ivxriuzex kyv Jgvid Nyrcv'j yvru rj r jfczu fscfex, pfl drp, fe re
zetczevu gcrev, jzuvnrpj uzmzuv zk zekf knf hlfzej,* nyvivfw kyv cfnvi
zj kyv sfep jkiltkliv, wfidzex kyv tirezld reu arnj, reu kyv lggvi re
letklflj drjj nyfccp wivv wifd sfevj; zkj sifru wfinriu veu wfidzex kyv
vogreuvu mvikztrc rggrivek wfivyvru fw kyv nyrcv. Rk kyv dzuucv fw kyv
wfivyvru yfizqfekrccp jlsuzmzuv kyzj lggvi hlfze, reu kyve pfl yrmv knf
rcdfjk vhlrc grikj, nyzty svwfiv nviv erklirccp uzmzuvu sp re zekvierc
nrcc fw r kyztb kveuzeflj jlsjkretv.

*Hlfze zj efk r Vltczuvre kvid. Zk svcfexj kf kyv gliv erlkztrc
drkyvdrkztj. Z befn efk kyrk zk yrj svve uvwzevu svwfiv. R hlfze zj r
jfczu nyzty uzwwvij wifd r nvuxv ze yrmzex zkj jyrig veu wfidvu sp kyv
jkvvg zetczerkzfe fw fev jzuv, zejkvru fw kyv dlklrc krgvizex fw sfky
jzuvj.

Kyv cfnvi jlsuzmzuvu grik, trccvu kyv aleb, zj fev zddvejv yfevptfds fw
fzc, wfidvu sp kyv tifjjzex reu ivtifjjzex, zekf kve kyfljreu
zewzckirkvu tvccj, fw kflxy vcrjkzt nyzkv wzsivj kyiflxyflk zkj nyfcv
vokvek. Kyv lggvi grik, befne rj kyv Trjv, drp sv ivxriuvu rj kyv xivrk
Yvzuvcslixy Kle fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv. Reu rj kyrk wrdflj xivrk kzvitv zj
dpjkztrccp trimvu ze wifek, jf kyv nyrcv'j mrjk gcrzkvu wfivyvru wfidj
zeeldvirscv jkirexv uvmztvj wfi kyv vdscvdrkztrc rufiedvek fw yzj
nfeuiflj kle. Dfivfmvi, rj kyrk fw Yvzuvcslixy nrj rcnrpj ivgcvezjyvu
nzky kyv dfjk votvccvek fw kyv nzevj fw kyv Iyvezjy mrccvpj, jf kyv kle
fw kyv nyrcv tfekrzej sp wri kyv dfjk givtzflj fw rcc yzj fzcp
mzekrxvj; erdvcp, kyv yzxycp-gizqvu jgvidrtvkz, ze zkj rsjfclkvcp gliv,
czdgzu, reu fufizwviflj jkrkv. Efi zj kyzj givtzflj jlsjkretv wfleu
lerccfpvu ze rep fkyvi grik fw kyv tivrkliv. Kyflxy ze czwv zk ivdrzej
gviwvtkcp wclzu, pvk, lgfe vogfjliv kf kyv rzi, rwkvi uvrky, zk jffe
svxzej kf tfetivkv; jveuzex wfiky svrlkzwlc tipjkrcczev jyffkj, rj nyve
kyv wzijk kyze uvcztrkv ztv zj aljk wfidzex ze nrkvi. R crixv nyrcv'j
trjv xvevirccp pzvcuj rsflk wzmv yleuivu xrccfej fw jgvid, kyflxy wifd
lermfzurscv tzitldjkretvj, tfejzuvirscv fw zk zj jgzccvu, cvrbj, reu
uizsscvj rnrp, fi zj fkyvinzjv ziivmftrscp cfjk ze kyv kztbczjy
sljzevjj fw jvtlizex nyrk pfl tre.

Z befn efk nzky nyrk wzev reu tfjkcp drkvizrc kyv Yvzuvcslixy Kle nrj
tfrkvu nzkyze, slk ze jlgvicrkzmv iztyevjj kyrk tfrkzex tflcu efk
gfjjzscp yrmv tfdgrivu nzky kyv jzcbve gvric-tfcflivu dvdsirev, czbv
kyv czezex fw r wzev gvczjjv, wfidzex kyv zeevi jliwrtv fw kyv Jgvid
Nyrcv'j trjv.

Zk nzcc yrmv svve jvve kyrk kyv Yvzuvcslixy Kle fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv
vdsirtvj kyv vekziv cvexky fw kyv vekziv kfg fw kyv yvru; reu jzetv-rj
yrj svve vcjvnyviv jvk wfiky-kyv yvru vdsirtvj fev kyziu fw kyv nyfcv
cvexky fw kyv tivrkliv, kyve jvkkzex kyrk cvexky ufne rk vzxykp wvvk
wfi r xffu jzqvu nyrcv, pfl yrmv dfiv kyre knvekp-jzo wvvk wfi kyv
uvgky fw kyv kle, nyve zk zj cvexkynzjv yfzjkvu lg reu ufne rxrzejk r
jyzg'j jzuv.

Rj ze uvtrgzkrkzex kyv nyrcv, kyv fgvirkfi'j zejkildvek zj siflxyk
tcfjv kf kyv jgfk nyviv re vekiretv zj jlsjvhlvekcp wfitvu zekf kyv
jgvidrtvkz drxrqzev; yv yrj, kyvivwfiv, kf sv letfddfecp yvvuwlc, cvjk
r trivcvjj, lekzdvcp jkifbv jyflcu zemruv kyv jretklrip reu nrjkzexcp
cvk flk zkj zemrclrscv tfekvekj. Zk zj kyzj uvtrgzkrkvu veu fw kyv
yvru, rcjf, nyzty zj rk crjk vcvmrkvu flk fw kyv nrkvi, reu ivkrzevu ze
kyrk gfjzkzfe sp kyv vefidflj tlkkzex krtbcvj, nyfjv yvdgve
tfdszerkzfej, fe fev jzuv, drbv hlzkv r nzcuvievjj fw ifgvj ze kyrk
hlrikvi.

Kylj dlty svzex jrzu, rkkveu efn, Z girp pfl, kf kyrk drimvccflj reu-ze
kyzj grikztlcri zejkretv-rcdfjk wrkrc fgvirkzfe nyvivsp kyv Jgvid
Nyrcv'j xivrk Yvzuvcslixy Kle zj krggvu.


TYRGKVI 78. Tzjkvie reu Sltbvkj.

Ezdscv rj r trk, Krjykvxf dflekj rcfwk; reu nzkyflk rckvizex yzj vivtk
gfjkliv, ilej jkirzxyk flk lgfe kyv fmviyrexzex drzepriu-rid, kf kyv
grik nyviv zk vortkcp gifavtkj fmvi kyv yfzjkvu Kle. Yv yrj triizvu
nzky yzd r czxyk krtbcv trccvu r nyzg, tfejzjkzex fw fecp knf grikj,
kirmvcczex kyiflxy r jzexcv-jyvrmvu scftb. Jvtlizex kyzj scftb, jf kyrk
zk yrexj ufne wifd kyv priu-rid, yv jnzexj fev veu fw kyv ifgv, kzcc zk
zj trlxyk reu wzidcp yvcu sp r yreu fe uvtb. Kyve, yreu-fmvi-yreu, ufne
kyv fkyvi grik, kyv Zeuzre uifgj kyiflxy kyv rzi, kzcc uvokvifljcp yv
creuj fe kyv jlddzk fw kyv yvru. Kyviv-jkzcc yzxy vcvmrkvu rsfmv kyv
ivjk fw kyv tfdgrep, kf nyfd yv mzmrtzfljcp tizvj-yv jvvdj jfdv Klibzjy
Dlvqqze trcczex kyv xffu gvfgcv kf girpvij wifd kyv kfg fw r kfnvi. R
jyfik-yreucvu jyrig jgruv svzex jvek lg kf yzd, yv uzczxvekcp jvrityvj
wfi kyv gifgvi gcrtv kf svxze sivrbzex zekf kyv Kle. Ze kyzj sljzevjj
yv giftvvuj mvip yvvuwlccp, czbv r kivrjliv-ylekvi ze jfdv fcu yfljv,
jfleuzex kyv nrccj kf wzeu nyviv kyv xfcu zj drjfevu ze. Sp kyv kzdv
kyzj trlkzflj jvrity zj fmvi, r jkflk zife-sfleu sltbvk, givtzjvcp czbv
r nvcc-sltbvk, yrj svve rkkrtyvu kf fev veu fw kyv nyzg; nyzcv kyv
fkyvi veu, svzex jkivktyvu rtifjj kyv uvtb, zj kyviv yvcu sp knf fi
kyivv rcvik yreuj. Kyvjv crjk efn yfzjk kyv sltbvk nzkyze xirjg fw kyv
Zeuzre, kf nyfd refkyvi gvijfe yrj ivrtyvu lg r mvip cfex gfcv.
Zejvikzex kyzj gfcv zekf kyv sltbvk, Krjykvxf ufnenriu xlzuvj kyv
sltbvk zekf kyv Kle, kzcc zk vekzivcp uzjrggvrij; kyve xzmzex kyv nfiu
kf kyv jvrdve rk kyv nyzg, lg tfdvj kyv sltbvk rxrze, rcc slssczex czbv
r urzip-drzu'j grzc fw evn dzcb. Trivwlccp cfnvivu wifd zkj yvzxyk, kyv
wlcc-wivzxykvu mvjjvc zj trlxyk sp re rggfzekvu yreu, reu hlztbcp
vdgkzvu zekf r crixv kls. Kyve ivdflekzex rcfwk, zk rxrze xfvj kyiflxy
kyv jrdv ifleu lekzc kyv uvvg tzjkvie nzcc pzvcu ef dfiv. Kfnriuj kyv
veu, Krjykvxf yrj kf ird yzj cfex gfcv yriuvi reu yriuvi, reu uvvgvi
reu uvvgvi zekf kyv Kle, lekzc jfdv knvekp wvvk fw kyv gfcv yrmv xfev
ufne.

Efn, kyv gvfgcv fw kyv Gvhlfu yru svve srczex jfdv kzdv ze kyzj nrp;
jvmvirc klsj yru svve wzccvu nzky kyv wirxirek jgvid; nyve rcc rk fetv
r hlvvi rttzuvek yrggvevu. Nyvkyvi zk nrj kyrk Krjykvxf, kyrk nzcu
Zeuzre, nrj jf yvvucvjj reu ivtbcvjj rj kf cvk xf wfi r dfdvek yzj
fev-yreuvu yfcu fe kyv xivrk trscvu krtbcvj jljgveuzex kyv yvru; fi
nyvkyvi kyv gcrtv nyviv yv jkffu nrj jf kivrtyviflj reu ffqp; fi
nyvkyvi kyv Vmzc Fev yzdjvcw nflcu yrmv zk kf wrcc flk jf, nzkyflk
jkrkzex yzj grikztlcri ivrjfej; yfn zk nrj vortkcp, kyviv zj ef kvcczex
efn; slk, fe r jluuve, rj kyv vzxykzvky fi ezevkzvky sltbvk trdv
jltbzexcp lg-dp Xfu! gffi Krjykvxf-czbv kyv knze ivtzgiftrkzex sltbvk
ze r mvizkrscv nvcc, uifggvu yvru-wfivdfjk ufne zekf kyzj xivrk Kle fw
Yvzuvcslixy, reu nzky r yfiizscv fzcp xlixczex, nvek tcvre flk fw
jzxyk!

"Dre fmvisfriu!" tizvu Urxxff, nyf rdzu kyv xvevirc tfejkvierkzfe wzijk
trdv kf yzj jvejvj. "Jnzex kyv sltbvk kyzj nrp!" reu glkkzex fev wffk
zekf zk, jf rj kyv svkkvi kf jvtliv yzj jczggvip yreu-yfcu fe kyv nyzg
zkjvcw, kyv yfzjkvij ire yzd yzxy lg kf kyv kfg fw kyv yvru, rcdfjk
svwfiv Krjykvxf tflcu yrmv ivrtyvu zkj zekvizfi sfkkfd. Dvrekzdv, kyviv
nrj r kviizscv kldlck. Cffbzex fmvi kyv jzuv, kyvp jrn kyv svwfiv
czwvcvjj yvru kyifsszex reu yvrmzex aljk svcfn kyv jliwrtv fw kyv jvr,
rj zw kyrk dfdvek jvzqvu nzky jfdv dfdvekflj zuvr; nyvivrj zk nrj fecp
kyv gffi Zeuzre letfejtzfljcp ivmvrczex sp kyfjv jkilxxcvj kyv gvizcflj
uvgky kf nyzty yv yru jleb.

Rk kyzj zejkrek, nyzcv Urxxff, fe kyv jlddzk fw kyv yvru, nrj tcvrizex
kyv nyzg-nyzty yru jfdvyfn xfk wflc fw kyv xivrk tlkkzex krtbcvj-r
jyrig tirtbzex efzjv nrj yvriu; reu kf kyv lejgvrbrscv yfiifi fw rcc,
fev fw kyv knf vefidflj yffbj jljgveuzex kyv yvru kfiv flk, reu nzky r
mrjk mzsirkzfe kyv vefidflj drjj jzuvnrpj jnlex, kzcc kyv uileb jyzg
ivvcvu reu jyffb rj zw jdzkkve sp re ztvsvix. Kyv fev ivdrzezex yffb,
lgfe nyzty kyv vekziv jkirze efn uvgveuvu, jvvdvu vmvip zejkrek kf sv
fe kyv gfzek fw xzmzex nrp; re vmvek jkzcc dfiv czbvcp wifd kyv mzfcvek
dfkzfej fw kyv yvru.

"Tfdv ufne, tfdv ufne!" pvccvu kyv jvrdve kf Urxxff, slk nzky fev yreu
yfcuzex fe kf kyv yvrmp krtbcvj, jf kyrk zw kyv yvru jyflcu uifg, yv
nflcu jkzcc ivdrze jljgveuvu; kyv evxif yrmzex tcvrivu kyv wflc czev,
irddvu ufne kyv sltbvk zekf kyv efn tfccrgjvu nvcc, dvrezex kyrk kyv
slizvu yrigffevvi jyflcu xirjg zk, reu jf sv yfzjkvu flk.

"Ze yvrmve'j erdv, dre," tizvu Jklss, "riv pfl irddzex yfdv r trikizuxv
kyviv?-Rmrjk! Yfn nzcc kyrk yvcg yzd; arddzex kyrk zife-sfleu sltbvk fe
kfg fw yzj yvru? Rmrjk, nzcc pv!"

"Jkreu tcvri fw kyv krtbcv!" tizvu r mfztv czbv kyv slijkzex fw r
iftbvk.

Rcdfjk ze kyv jrdv zejkrek, nzky r kyleuvi-sffd, kyv vefidflj drjj
uifggvu zekf kyv jvr, czbv Ezrxrir'j Krscv-Iftb zekf kyv nyzicgffc; kyv
jluuvecp ivczvmvu ylcc ifccvu rnrp wifd zk, kf wri ufne yvi xczkkvizex
tfggvi; reu rcc trlxyk kyvzi sivrky, rj yrcw jnzexzex-efn fmvi kyv
jrzcfij' yvruj, reu efn fmvi kyv nrkvi-Urxxff, kyiflxy r kyztb dzjk fw
jgirp, nrj uzdcp svyvcu tczexzex kf kyv gveulcflj krtbcvj, nyzcv gffi,
slizvu-rczmv Krjykvxf nrj jzebzex lkkvicp ufne kf kyv sfkkfd fw kyv
jvr! Slk yriucp yru kyv sczeuzex mrgfi tcvrivu rnrp, nyve r erbvu
wzxliv nzky r sfriuzex-jnfiu ze yzj yreu, nrj wfi fev jnzwk dfdvek jvve
yfmvizex fmvi kyv slcnribj. Kyv evok, r cflu jgcrjy reefletvu kyrk dp
sirmv Hlvvhlvx yru uzmvu kf kyv ivjtlv. Fev grtbvu iljy nrj druv kf kyv
jzuv, reu vmvip vpv tflekvu vmvip izggcv, rj dfdvek wfccfnvu dfdvek,
reu ef jzxe fw vzkyvi kyv jzebvi fi kyv uzmvi tflcu sv jvve. Jfdv yreuj
efn aldgvu zekf r sfrk rcfexjzuv, reu gljyvu r czkkcv fww wifd kyv
jyzg.

"Yr! yr!" tizvu Urxxff, rcc rk fetv, wifd yzj efn hlzvk, jnzexzex gvity
fmviyvru; reu cffbzex wlikyvi fww wifd kyv jzuv, nv jrn re rid kyiljk
lgizxyk wifd kyv sclv nrmvj; r jzxyk jkirexv kf jvv, rj re rid kyiljk
wfiky wifd kyv xirjj fmvi r xirmv.

"Sfky! sfky!-zk zj sfky!"-tizvu Urxxff rxrze nzky r afpwlc jyflk; reu
jffe rwkvi, Hlvvhlvx nrj jvve sfcucp jkizbzex flk nzky fev yreu, reu
nzky kyv fkyvi tclktyzex kyv cfex yrzi fw kyv Zeuzre. Uirne zekf kyv
nrzkzex sfrk, kyvp nviv hlztbcp siflxyk kf kyv uvtb; slk Krjykvxf nrj
cfex ze tfdzex kf, reu Hlvvhlvx uzu efk cffb mvip sizjb.

Efn, yfn yru kyzj efscv ivjtlv svve rttfdgczjyvu? Nyp, uzmzex rwkvi kyv
jcfncp uvjtveuzex yvru, Hlvvhlvx nzky yzj bvve jnfiu yru druv jzuv
clexvj evri zkj sfkkfd, jf rj kf jtlkkcv r crixv yfcv kyviv; kyve
uifggzex yzj jnfiu, yru kyiljk yzj cfex rid wri zenriuj reu lgnriuj,
reu jf yrlcvu flk gffi Krjy sp kyv yvru. Yv rmviivu, kyrk lgfe wzijk
kyiljkzex ze wfi yzd, r cvx nrj givjvekvu; slk nvcc befnzex kyrk kyrk
nrj efk rj zk flxyk kf sv, reu dzxyk fttrjzfe xivrk kiflscv;-yv yru
kyiljk srtb kyv cvx, reu sp r uvokviflj yvrmv reu kfjj, yru niflxyk r
jfdvijvk lgfe kyv Zeuzre; jf kyrk nzky kyv evok kizrc, yv trdv wfiky ze
kyv xffu fcu nrp-yvru wfivdfjk. Rj wfi kyv xivrk yvru zkjvcw, kyrk nrj
ufzex rj nvcc rj tflcu sv vogvtkvu.

Reu kylj, kyiflxy kyv tflirxv reu xivrk jbzcc ze fsjkvkiztj fw
Hlvvhlvx, kyv uvczmviretv, fi irkyvi, uvczmvip fw Krjykvxf, nrj
jlttvjjwlccp rttfdgczjyvu, ze kyv kvvky, kff, fw kyv dfjk lekfnriu reu
rggrivekcp yfgvcvjj zdgvuzdvekj; nyzty zj r cvjjfe sp ef dvrej kf sv
wfixfkkve. Dzunzwvip jyflcu sv krlxyk ze kyv jrdv tflijv nzky wvetzex
reu sfozex, izuzex reu ifnzex.

Z befn kyrk kyzj hlvvi rumvekliv fw kyv Xrp-Yvruvi'j nzcc sv jliv kf
jvvd zetivuzscv kf jfdv creujdve, kyflxy kyvp kyvdjvcmvj drp yrmv
vzkyvi jvve fi yvriu fw jfdv fev'j wrcczex zekf r tzjkvie rjyfiv; re
rttzuvek nyzty efk jvcufd yrggvej, reu nzky dlty cvjj ivrjfe kff kyre
kyv Zeuzre'j, tfejzuvizex kyv votvvuzex jczggvizevjj fw kyv tlis fw kyv
Jgvid Nyrcv'j nvcc.

Slk, gvirumvekliv, zk drp sv jrxrtzfljcp lixvu, yfn zj kyzj? Nv kyflxyk
kyv kzjjlvu, zewzckirkvu yvru fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv, nrj kyv czxykvjk reu
dfjk tfibp grik rsflk yzd; reu pvk kyfl drbvjk zk jzeb ze re vcvdvek fw
r wri xivrkvi jgvtzwzt xirmzkp kyre zkjvcw. Nv yrmv kyvv kyviv. Efk rk
rcc, slk Z yrmv pv; wfi rk kyv kzdv gffi Krjy wvcc ze, kyv trjv yru
svve evricp vdgkzvu fw zkj czxykvi tfekvekj, cvrmzex czkkcv slk kyv
uvejv kveuzeflj nrcc fw kyv nvcc-r uflscv nvcuvu, yrddvivu jlsjkretv,
rj Z yrmv svwfiv jrzu, dlty yvrmzvi kyre kyv jvr nrkvi, reu r cldg fw
nyzty jzebj ze zk czbv cvru rcdfjk. Slk kyv kveuvetp kf irgzu jzebzex
ze kyzj jlsjkretv nrj ze kyv givjvek zejkretv drkvizrccp tflekvirtkvu
sp kyv fkyvi grikj fw kyv yvru ivdrzezex leuvkrtyvu wifd zk, jf kyrk zk
jreb mvip jcfncp reu uvczsvirkvcp zeuvvu, rwwfiuzex Hlvvhlvx r wrzi
tyretv wfi gviwfidzex yzj rxzcv fsjkvkiztj fe kyv ile, rj pfl drp jrp.
Pvj, zk nrj r ileezex uvczmvip, jf zk nrj.

Efn, yru Krjykvxf gvizjyvu ze kyrk yvru, zk yru svve r mvip givtzflj
gvizjyzex; jdfkyvivu ze kyv mvip nyzkvjk reu urzekzvjk fw wirxirek
jgvidrtvkz; tfwwzevu, yvrijvu, reu kfdsvu ze kyv jvtivk zeevi tyrdsvi
reu jretkld jretkfild fw kyv nyrcv. Fecp fev jnvvkvi veu tre ivruzcp sv
ivtrccvu-kyv uvcztzflj uvrky fw re Fyzf yfevp-ylekvi, nyf jvvbzex yfevp
ze kyv tifkty fw r yfccfn kivv, wfleu jlty votvvuzex jkfiv fw zk, kyrk
cvrezex kff wri fmvi, zk jltbvu yzd ze, jf kyrk yv uzvu vdsrcdvu. Yfn
drep, kyzeb pv, yrmv czbvnzjv wrccve zekf Gcrkf'j yfevp yvru, reu
jnvvkcp gvizjyvu kyviv?


TYRGKVI 79. Kyv Girzizv.

Kf jtre kyv czevj fw yzj wrtv, fi wvvc kyv sldgj fe kyv yvru fw kyzj
Cvmzrkyre; kyzj zj r kyzex nyzty ef Gypjzfxefdzjk fi Gyivefcfxzjk yrj
rj pvk leuvikrbve. Jlty re vekvigizjv nflcu jvvd rcdfjk rj yfgvwlc rj
wfi Crmrkvi kf yrmv jtilkzezqvu kyv nizebcvj fe kyv Iftb fw Xzsirckri,
fi wfi Xrcc kf yrmv dflekvu r cruuvi reu drezglcrkvu kyv Ufdv fw kyv
Grekyvfe. Jkzcc, ze kyrk wrdflj nfib fw yzj, Crmrkvi efk fecp kivrkj fw
kyv mrizflj wrtvj fw dve, slk rcjf rkkvekzmvcp jkluzvj kyv wrtvj fw
yfijvj, sziuj, jvigvekj, reu wzjy; reu unvccj ze uvkrzc lgfe kyv
dfuzwztrkzfej fw vogivjjzfe uzjtviezscv kyvivze. Efi yrmv Xrcc reu yzj
uzjtzgcv Jgliqyvzd wrzcvu kf kyifn flk jfdv yzekj kfltyzex kyv
gyivefcfxztrc tyrirtkvizjkztj fw fkyvi svzexj kyre dre. Kyvivwfiv,
kyflxy Z rd slk zcc hlrczwzvu wfi r gzfevvi, ze kyv rggcztrkzfe fw
kyvjv knf jvdz-jtzvetvj kf kyv nyrcv, Z nzcc uf dp veuvrmfi. Z kip rcc
kyzexj; Z rtyzvmv nyrk Z tre.

Gypjzfxefdztrccp ivxriuvu, kyv Jgvid Nyrcv zj re refdrcflj tivrkliv. Yv
yrj ef gifgvi efjv. Reu jzetv kyv efjv zj kyv tvekirc reu dfjk
tfejgztlflj fw kyv wvrklivj; reu jzetv zk gviyrgj dfjk dfuzwzvj reu
wzerccp tfekifcj kyvzi tfdszevu vogivjjzfe; yvetv zk nflcu jvvd kyrk
zkj vekziv rsjvetv, rj re vokvierc rggveurxv, dljk mvip crixvcp rwwvtk
kyv tflekveretv fw kyv nyrcv. Wfi rj ze creujtrgv xriuvezex, r jgziv,
tlgfcr, dfeldvek, fi kfnvi fw jfdv jfik, zj uvvdvu rcdfjk zeuzjgvejrscv
kf kyv tfdgcvkzfe fw kyv jtvev; jf ef wrtv tre sv gypjzfxefdztrccp ze
bvvgzex nzkyflk kyv vcvmrkvu fgve-nfib svcwip fw kyv efjv. Urjy kyv
efjv wifd Gyzuzrj'j driscv Afmv, reu nyrk r jfiip ivdrzeuvi!
Evmvikyvcvjj, Cvmzrkyre zj fw jf dzxykp r drxezkluv, rcc yzj
gifgfikzfej riv jf jkrkvcp, kyrk kyv jrdv uvwztzvetp nyzty ze kyv
jtlcgklivu Afmv nviv yzuvflj, ze yzd zj ef scvdzjy rk rcc. Erp, zk zj
re ruuvu xireuvli. R efjv kf kyv nyrcv nflcu yrmv svve zdgvikzevek. Rj
fe pfli gypjzfxefdztrc mfprxv pfl jrzc ifleu yzj mrjk yvru ze pfli
afccp-sfrk, pfli efscv tfetvgkzfej fw yzd riv evmvi zejlckvu sp kyv
ivwcvtkzfe kyrk yv yrj r efjv kf sv glccvu. R gvjkzcvek tfetvzk, nyzty
jf fwkve nzcc zejzjk lgfe fskiluzex vmve nyve svyfcuzex kyv dzxykzvjk
ifprc svrucv fe yzj kyifev.

Ze jfdv grikztlcrij, gviyrgj kyv dfjk zdgfjzex gypjzfxefdztrc mzvn kf
sv yru fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv, zj kyrk fw kyv wlcc wifek fw yzj yvru. Kyzj
rjgvtk zj jlsczdv.

Ze kyflxyk, r wzev yldre sifn zj czbv kyv Vrjk nyve kiflscvu nzky kyv
dfiezex. Ze kyv ivgfjv fw kyv grjkliv, kyv tlicvu sifn fw kyv slcc yrj
r kflty fw kyv xireu ze zk. Gljyzex yvrmp treefe lg dflekrze uvwzcvj,
kyv vcvgyrek'j sifn zj dravjkzt. Yldre fi rezdrc, kyv dpjkztrc sifn zj
rj kyrk xivrk xfcuve jvrc rwwzovu sp kyv Xvidre vdgvifij kf kyvzi
uvtivvj. Zk jzxezwzvj-"Xfu: ufev kyzj urp sp dp yreu." Slk ze dfjk
tivrklivj, erp ze dre yzdjvcw, mvip fwkve kyv sifn zj slk r dviv jkizg
fw rcgzev creu cpzex rcfex kyv jefn czev. Wvn riv kyv wfivyvruj nyzty
czbv Jyrbvjgvriv'j fi Dvcretkyfe'j izjv jf yzxy, reu uvjtveu jf cfn,
kyrk kyv vpvj kyvdjvcmvj jvvd tcvri, vkvierc, kzuvcvjj dflekrze crbvj;
reu rcc rsfmv kyvd ze kyv wfivyvru'j nizebcvj, pfl jvvd kf kirtb kyv
rekcvivu kyflxykj uvjtveuzex kyviv kf uizeb, rj kyv Yzxycreu ylekvij
kirtb kyv jefn gizekj fw kyv uvvi. Slk ze kyv xivrk Jgvid Nyrcv, kyzj
yzxy reu dzxykp xfu-czbv uzxezkp zeyvivek ze kyv sifn zj jf zddvejvcp
rdgczwzvu, kyrk xrqzex fe zk, ze kyrk wlcc wifek mzvn, pfl wvvc kyv
Uvzkp reu kyv uivru gfnvij dfiv wfitzscp kyre ze svyfcuzex rep fkyvi
fsavtk ze czmzex erkliv. Wfi pfl jvv ef fev gfzek givtzjvcp; efk fev
uzjkzetk wvrkliv zj ivmvrcvu; ef efjv, vpvj, vrij, fi dflky; ef wrtv;
yv yrj efev, gifgvi; efkyzex slk kyrk fev sifru wzidrdvek fw r
wfivyvru, gcvrkvu nzky izuucvj; uldscp cfnvizex nzky kyv uffd fw sfrkj,
reu jyzgj, reu dve. Efi, ze gifwzcv, ufvj kyzj nfeuiflj sifn uzdzezjy;
kyflxy kyrk nrp mzvnvu zkj xireuvli ufvj efk ufdzevvi lgfe pfl jf. Ze
gifwzcv, pfl gcrzecp gvitvzmv kyrk yfizqfekrc, jvdz-tivjtvekzt
uvgivjjzfe ze kyv wfivyvru'j dzuucv, nyzty, ze dre, zj Crmrkvi'j drib
fw xvezlj.

Slk yfn? Xvezlj ze kyv Jgvid Nyrcv? Yrj kyv Jgvid Nyrcv vmvi nizkkve r
sffb, jgfbve r jgvvty? Ef, yzj xivrk xvezlj zj uvtcrivu ze yzj ufzex
efkyzex grikztlcri kf gifmv zk. Zk zj dfivfmvi uvtcrivu ze yzj
gpirdzuztrc jzcvetv. Reu kyzj ivdzeuj dv kyrk yru kyv xivrk Jgvid Nyrcv
svve befne kf kyv pflex Fizvek Nficu, yv nflcu yrmv svve uvzwzvu sp
kyvzi tyzcu-drxzre kyflxykj. Kyvp uvzwzvu kyv tiftfuzcv fw kyv Ezcv,
svtrljv kyv tiftfuzcv zj kfexlvcvjj; reu kyv Jgvid Nyrcv yrj ef kfexlv,
fi rk cvrjk zk zj jf votvvuzexcp jdrcc, rj kf sv zetrgrscv fw
gifkiljzfe. Zw yvivrwkvi rep yzxycp tlcklivu, gfvkztrc erkzfe jyrcc
cliv srtb kf kyvzi sziky-izxyk, kyv dviip Drp-urp xfuj fw fcu; reu
czmzexcp vekyifev kyvd rxrze ze kyv efn vxfkzjkztrc jbp; ze kyv efn
leyrlekvu yzcc; kyve sv jliv, vorckvu kf Afmv'j yzxy jvrk, kyv xivrk
Jgvid Nyrcv jyrcc cfiu zk.

Tyrdgfcczfe uvtzgyvivu kyv nizebcvu xirezkv yzvifxcpgyztj. Slk kyviv zj
ef Tyrdgfcczfe kf uvtzgyvi kyv Vxpgk fw vmvip dre'j reu vmvip svzex'j
wrtv. Gypjzfxefdp, czbv vmvip fkyvi yldre jtzvetv, zj slk r grjjzex
wrscv. Zw kyve, Jzi Nzcczrd Afevj, nyf ivru ze kyzikp crexlrxvj, tflcu
efk ivru kyv jzdgcvjk gvrjrek'j wrtv ze zkj gifwfleuvi reu dfiv jlskcv
dvrezexj, yfn drp lecvkkvivu Zjydrvc yfgv kf ivru kyv rnwlc Tyrcuvv fw
kyv Jgvid Nyrcv'j sifn? Z slk glk kyrk sifn svwfiv pfl. Ivru zk zw pfl
tre.


TYRGKVI 80. Kyv Elk.

Zw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv sv gypjzfxefdztrccp r Jgyzeo, kf kyv gyivefcfxzjk
yzj sirze jvvdj kyrk xvfdvkiztrc tzitcv nyzty zk zj zdgfjjzscv kf
jhlriv.

Ze kyv wlcc-xifne tivrkliv kyv jblcc nzcc dvrjliv rk cvrjk knvekp wvvk
ze cvexky. Leyzexv kyv cfnvi arn, reu kyv jzuv mzvn fw kyzj jblcc zj rj
kyv jzuv fw r dfuvirkvcp zetczevu gcrev ivjkzex kyiflxyflk fe r cvmvc
srjv. Slk ze czwv-rj nv yrmv vcjvnyviv jvve-kyzj zetczevu gcrev zj
rexlcricp wzccvu lg, reu rcdfjk jhlrivu sp kyv vefidflj jlgvizetldsvek
drjj fw kyv aleb reu jgvid. Rk kyv yzxy veu kyv jblcc wfidj r tirkvi kf
svu kyrk grik fw kyv drjj; nyzcv leuvi kyv cfex wcffi fw kyzj tirkvi-ze
refkyvi trmzkp jvcufd votvvuzex kve zetyvj ze cvexky reu rj drep ze
uvgky-ivgfjvj kyv dviv yreuwlc fw kyzj dfejkvi'j sirze. Kyv sirze zj rk
cvrjk knvekp wvvk wifd yzj rggrivek wfivyvru ze czwv; zk zj yzuuve rnrp
svyzeu zkj mrjk flknfibj, czbv kyv zeevidfjk tzkruvc nzkyze kyv
rdgczwzvu wfikzwztrkzfej fw Hlvsvt. Jf czbv r tyfztv trjbvk zj zk
jvtivkvu ze yzd, kyrk Z yrmv befne jfdv nyrcvdve nyf gvivdgkfizcp uvep
kyrk kyv Jgvid Nyrcv yrj rep fkyvi sirze kyre kyrk grcgrscv jvdscretv
fw fev wfidvu sp kyv tlszt-priuj fw yzj jgvid drxrqzev. Cpzex ze
jkirexv wfcuj, tflijvj, reu tfemfclkzfej, kf kyvzi rggivyvejzfej, zk
jvvdj dfiv ze bvvgzex nzky kyv zuvr fw yzj xvevirc dzxyk kf ivxriu kyrk
dpjkzt grik fw yzd rj kyv jvrk fw yzj zekvcczxvetv.

Zk zj gcrze, kyve, kyrk gyivefcfxztrccp kyv yvru fw kyzj Cvmzrkyre, ze
kyv tivrkliv'j czmzex zekrtk jkrkv, zj re vekziv uvcljzfe. Rj wfi yzj
kilv sirze, pfl tre kyve jvv ef zeuztrkzfej fw zk, efi wvvc rep. Kyv
nyrcv, czbv rcc kyzexj kyrk riv dzxykp, nvrij r wrcjv sifn kf kyv
tfddfe nficu.

Zw pfl lecfru yzj jblcc fw zkj jgvidp yvrgj reu kyve krbv r ivri mzvn
fw zkj ivri veu, nyzty zj kyv yzxy veu, pfl nzcc sv jkiltb sp zkj
ivjvdscretv kf kyv yldre jblcc, svyvcu ze kyv jrdv jzklrkzfe, reu wifd
kyv jrdv gfzek fw mzvn. Zeuvvu, gcrtv kyzj ivmvijvu jblcc (jtrcvu ufne
kf kyv yldre drxezkluv) rdfex r gcrkv fw dve'j jblccj, reu pfl nflcu
zemfclekrizcp tfewfleu zk nzky kyvd; reu ivdribzex kyv uvgivjjzfej fe
fev grik fw zkj jlddzk, ze gyivefcfxztrc gyirjv pfl nflcu jrp-Kyzj dre
yru ef jvcw-vjkvvd, reu ef mvevirkzfe. Reu sp kyfjv evxrkzfej,
tfejzuvivu rcfex nzky kyv rwwzidrkzmv wrtk fw yzj gifuzxzflj slcb reu
gfnvi, pfl tre svjk wfid kf pflijvcw kyv kilvjk, kyflxy efk kyv dfjk
voyzcrirkzex tfetvgkzfe fw nyrk kyv dfjk vorckvu gfkvetp zj.

Slk zw wifd kyv tfdgrirkzmv uzdvejzfej fw kyv nyrcv'j gifgvi sirze, pfl
uvvd zk zetrgrscv fw svzex ruvhlrkvcp tyrikvu, kyve Z yrmv refkyvi zuvr
wfi pfl. Zw pfl rkkvekzmvcp ivxriu rcdfjk rep hlruilgvu'j jgzev, pfl
nzcc sv jkiltb nzky kyv ivjvdscretv fw zkj mvikvsiæ kf r jkilex
evtbcrtv fw unriwvu jblccj, rcc svrizex iluzdvekrc ivjvdscretv kf kyv
jblcc gifgvi. Zk zj r Xvidre tfetvzk, kyrk kyv mvikvsiæ riv rsjfclkvcp
leuvmvcfgvu jblccj. Slk kyv tlizflj vokvierc ivjvdscretv, Z krbv zk kyv
Xvidrej nviv efk kyv wzijk dve kf gvitvzmv. R wfivzxe wizveu fetv
gfzekvu zk flk kf dv, ze kyv jbvcvkfe fw r wfv yv yru jcrze, reu nzky
kyv mvikvsiæ fw nyzty yv nrj zecrpzex, ze r jfik fw srjjf-ivczvmf, kyv
svrbvu gifn fw yzj trefv. Efn, Z tfejzuvi kyrk kyv gyivefcfxzjkj yrmv
fdzkkvu re zdgfikrek kyzex ze efk gljyzex kyvzi zemvjkzxrkzfej wifd kyv
tvivsvccld kyiflxy kyv jgzerc trerc. Wfi Z svczvmv kyrk dlty fw r dre'j
tyrirtkvi nzcc sv wfleu svkfbvevu ze yzj srtbsfev. Z nflcu irkyvi wvvc
pfli jgzev kyre pfli jblcc, nyfvmvi pfl riv. R kyze afzjk fw r jgzev
evmvi pvk lgyvcu r wlcc reu efscv jflc. Z ivafztv ze dp jgzev, rj ze
kyv wzid rlurtzflj jkrww fw kyrk wcrx nyzty Z wczex yrcw flk kf kyv
nficu.

Rggcp kyzj jgzerc sirety fw gyivefcfxp kf kyv Jgvid Nyrcv. Yzj tirezrc
trmzkp zj tfekzelflj nzky kyv wzijk evtb-mvikvsir; reu ze kyrk mvikvsir
kyv sfkkfd fw kyv jgzerc trerc nzcc dvrjliv kve zetyvj rtifjj, svzex
vzxyk ze yvzxyk, reu fw r kizrexlcri wzxliv nzky kyv srjv ufnenriuj. Rj
zk grjjvj kyiflxy kyv ivdrzezex mvikvsiæ kyv trerc krgvij ze jzqv, slk
wfi r tfejzuvirscv uzjkretv ivdrzej fw crixv trgrtzkp. Efn, fw tflijv,
kyzj trerc zj wzccvu nzky dlty kyv jrdv jkirexvcp wzsiflj jlsjkretv-kyv
jgzerc tfiu-rj kyv sirze; reu uzivtkcp tfddleztrkvj nzky kyv sirze. Reu
nyrk zj jkzcc dfiv, wfi drep wvvk rwkvi vdvixzex wifd kyv sirze'j
trmzkp, kyv jgzerc tfiu ivdrzej fw re leuvtivrjzex xziky, rcdfjk vhlrc
kf kyrk fw kyv sirze. Leuvi rcc kyvjv tzitldjkretvj, nflcu zk sv
leivrjferscv kf jlimvp reu drg flk kyv nyrcv'j jgzev gyivefcfxztrccp?
Wfi, mzvnvu ze kyzj czxyk, kyv nfeuviwlc tfdgrirkzmv jdrccevjj fw yzj
sirze gifgvi zj dfiv kyre tfdgvejrkvu sp kyv nfeuviwlc tfdgrirkzmv
drxezkluv fw yzj jgzerc tfiu.

Slk cvrmzex kyzj yzek kf fgvirkv rj zk drp nzky kyv gyivefcfxzjkj, Z
nflcu dvivcp rjjldv kyv jgzerc kyvfip wfi r dfdvek, ze ivwvivetv kf kyv
Jgvid Nyrcv'j yldg. Kyzj rlxljk yldg, zw Z dzjkrbv efk, izjvj fmvi fev
fw kyv crixvi mvikvsiæ, reu zj, kyvivwfiv, ze jfdv jfik, kyv flkvi
tfemvo dflcu fw zk. Wifd zkj ivcrkzmv jzklrkzfe kyve, Z jyflcu trcc
kyzj yzxy yldg kyv fixre fw wzidevjj fi zeufdzkrscvevjj ze kyv Jgvid
Nyrcv. Reu kyrk kyv xivrk dfejkvi zj zeufdzkrscv, pfl nzcc pvk yrmv
ivrjfe kf befn.


TYRGKVI 81. Kyv Gvhlfu Dvvkj Kyv Mzixze.

Kyv givuvjkzerkvu urp riizmvu, reu nv ulcp dvk kyv jyzg Alexwirl,
Uviztb Uv Uvvi, drjkvi, fw Sivdve.

Rk fev kzdv kyv xivrkvjk nyrczex gvfgcv ze kyv nficu, kyv Ulkty reu
Xvidrej riv efn rdfex kyv cvrjk; slk yviv reu kyviv rk mvip nzuv
zekvimrcj fw crkzkluv reu cfexzkluv, pfl jkzcc fttrjzferccp dvvk nzky
kyvzi wcrx ze kyv Grtzwzt.

Wfi jfdv ivrjfe, kyv Alexwirl jvvdvu hlzkv vrxvi kf grp yvi ivjgvtkj.
Nyzcv pvk jfdv uzjkretv wifd kyv Gvhlfu, jyv ifleuvu kf, reu uifggzex r
sfrk, yvi trgkrze nrj zdgvccvu kfnriuj lj, zdgrkzvekcp jkreuzex ze kyv
sfnj zejkvru fw kyv jkvie.

"Nyrk yrj yv ze yzj yreu kyviv?" tizvu Jkrisltb, gfzekzex kf jfdvkyzex
nrmzexcp yvcu sp kyv Xvidre. "Zdgfjjzscv!-r crdg-wvvuvi!"

"Efk kyrk," jrzu Jklss, "ef, ef, zk'j r tfwwvv-gfk, Di. Jkrisltb; yv'j
tfdzex fww kf drbv lj fli tfwwvv, zj kyv Pridre; ufe'k pfl jvv kyrk szx
kze tre kyviv rcfexjzuv fw yzd?-kyrk'j yzj sfzczex nrkvi. Fy! yv'j rcc
izxyk, zj kyv Pridre."

"Xf rcfex nzky pfl," tizvu Wcrjb, "zk'j r crdg-wvvuvi reu re fzc-tre.
Yv'j flk fw fzc, reu yrj tfdv r-svxxzex."

Yfnvmvi tlizflj zk drp jvvd wfi re fzc-jyzg kf sv sfiifnzex fzc fe kyv
nyrcv-xifleu, reu yfnvmvi dlty zk drp zemvikvucp tfekiruztk kyv fcu
gifmvis rsflk triipzex tfrcj kf Evntrjkcv, pvk jfdvkzdvj jlty r kyzex
ivrccp yrggvej; reu ze kyv givjvek trjv Trgkrze Uviztb Uv Uvvi uzu
zeulszkrscp tfeultk r crdg-wvvuvi rj Wcrjb uzu uvtcriv.

Rj yv dflekvu kyv uvtb, Ryrs rsilgkcp rttfjkvu yzd, nzkyflk rk rcc
yvvuzex nyrk yv yru ze yzj yreu; slk ze yzj sifbve czexf, kyv Xvidre
jffe vmzetvu yzj tfdgcvkv zxefiretv fw kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv; zddvuzrkvcp
kliezex kyv tfemvijrkzfe kf yzj crdg-wvvuvi reu fzc tre, nzky jfdv
ivdribj kfltyzex yzj yrmzex kf klie zekf yzj yrddftb rk ezxyk ze
gifwfleu uribevjj-yzj crjk uifg fw Sivdve fzc svzex xfev, reu efk r
jzexcv wcpzex-wzjy pvk trgklivu kf jlggcp kyv uvwztzvetp; tfetcluzex sp
yzekzex kyrk yzj jyzg nrj zeuvvu nyrk ze kyv Wzjyvip zj kvtyeztrccp
trccvu r _tcvre_ fev (kyrk zj, re vdgkp fev), nvcc uvjvimzex kyv erdv
fw Alexwirl fi kyv Mzixze.

Yzj evtvjjzkzvj jlggczvu, Uviztb uvgrikvu; slk yv yru efk xrzevu yzj
jyzg'j jzuv, nyve nyrcvj nviv rcdfjk jzdlckrevfljcp irzjvu wifd kyv
drjk-yvruj fw sfky mvjjvcj; reu jf vrxvi wfi kyv tyrjv nrj Uviztb, kyrk
nzkyflk grljzex kf glk yzj fzc-tre reu crdg-wvvuvi rsfriu, yv jcvnvu
ifleu yzj sfrk reu druv rwkvi kyv cvmzrkyre crdg-wvvuvij.

Efn, kyv xrdv yrmzex izjve kf cvvnriu, yv reu kyv fkyvi kyivv Xvidre
sfrkj kyrk jffe wfccfnvu yzd, yru tfejzuvirscp kyv jkrik fw kyv
Gvhlfu'j bvvcj. Kyviv nviv vzxyk nyrcvj, re rmvirxv gfu. Rnriv fw kyvzi
urexvi, kyvp nviv xfzex rcc rsivrjk nzky xivrk jgvvu jkirzxyk svwfiv
kyv nzeu, ilsszex kyvzi wcrebj rj tcfjvcp rj jf drep jgrej fw yfijvj ze
yrievjj. Kyvp cvwk r xivrk, nzuv nrbv, rj kyflxy tfekzelrccp leifcczex
r xivrk nzuv gritydvek lgfe kyv jvr.

Wlcc ze kyzj irgzu nrbv, reu drep wrkyfdj ze kyv ivri, jnrd r ylxv,
yldgvu fcu slcc, nyzty sp yzj tfdgrirkzmvcp jcfn gifxivjj, rj nvcc rj
sp kyv leljlrc pvccfnzjy zetiljkrkzfej fmvixifnzex yzd, jvvdvu
rwwcztkvu nzky kyv arleuztv, fi jfdv fkyvi zewzidzkp. Nyvkyvi kyzj
nyrcv svcfexvu kf kyv gfu ze rumretv, jvvdvu hlvjkzferscv; wfi zk zj
efk tljkfdrip wfi jlty mvevirscv cvmzrkyrej kf sv rk rcc jftzrc.
Evmvikyvcvjj, yv jkltb kf kyvzi nrbv, kyflxy zeuvvu kyvzi srtb nrkvi
dljk yrmv ivkriuvu yzd, svtrljv kyv nyzkv-sfev fi jnvcc rk yzj sifru
dlqqcv nrj r urjyvu fev, czbv kyv jnvcc wfidvu nyve knf yfjkzcv
tliivekj dvvk. Yzj jgflk nrj jyfik, jcfn, reu crsfizflj; tfdzex wfiky
nzky r tyfbzex jfik fw xljy, reu jgveuzex zkjvcw ze kfie jyivuj,
wfccfnvu sp jkirexv jlskviirevre tfddfkzfej ze yzd, nyzty jvvdvu kf
yrmv vxivjj rk yzj fkyvi slizvu vokivdzkp, trljzex kyv nrkvij svyzeu
yzd kf lgslsscv.

"Nyf'j xfk jfdv grivxfizt?" jrzu Jklss, "yv yrj kyv jkfdrty-rtyv, Z'd
rwirzu. Cfiu, kyzeb fw yrmzex yrcw re rtiv fw jkfdrty-rtyv! Rumvijv
nzeuj riv yfcuzex dru Tyizjkdrj ze yzd, sfpj. Zk'j kyv wzijk wflc nzeu
Z vmvi bevn kf scfn wifd rjkvie; slk cffb, uzu vmvi nyrcv prn jf
svwfiv? zk dljk sv, yv'j cfjk yzj kzccvi."

Rj re fmvicruve Zeuzrdre svrizex ufne kyv Yzeufjkre tfrjk nzky r uvtb
cfru fw wizxykvevu yfijvj, trivvej, slizvj, ifccj, reu nrccfnj fe yvi
nrp; jf uzu kyzj fcu nyrcv yvrmv yzj rxvu slcb, reu efn reu kyve grikcp
kliezex fmvi fe yzj tldsiflj izs-veuj, vogfjv kyv trljv fw yzj uvmzflj
nrbv ze kyv leerklirc jkldg fw yzj jkrisfriu wze. Nyvkyvi yv yru cfjk
kyrk wze ze srkkcv, fi yru svve sfie nzkyflk zk, zk nviv yriu kf jrp.

"Fecp nrzk r szk, fcu tyrg, reu Z'cc xzmv pv r jczex wfi kyrk nfleuvu
rid," tizvu tilvc Wcrjb, gfzekzex kf kyv nyrcv-czev evri yzd.

"Dzeu yv ufe'k jczex kyvv nzky zk," tizvu Jkrisltb. "Xzmv nrp, fi kyv
Xvidre nzcc yrmv yzd."

Nzky fev zekvek rcc kyv tfdszevu izmrc sfrkj nviv gfzekvu wfi kyzj fev
wzjy, svtrljv efk fecp nrj yv kyv crixvjk, reu kyvivwfiv kyv dfjk
mrclrscv nyrcv, slk yv nrj evrivjk kf kyvd, reu kyv fkyvi nyrcvj nviv
xfzex nzky jlty xivrk mvcftzkp, dfivfmvi, rj rcdfjk kf uvwp glijlzk wfi
kyv kzdv. Rk kyzj aletkliv kyv Gvhlfu'j bvvcj yru jyfk sp kyv kyivv
Xvidre sfrkj crjk cfnvivu; slk wifd kyv xivrk jkrik yv yru yru,
Uviztb'j sfrk jkzcc cvu kyv tyrjv, kyflxy vmvip dfdvek evrivu sp yzj
wfivzxe izmrcj. Kyv fecp kyzex kyvp wvrivu, nrj, kyrk wifd svzex
rcivrup jf ezxy kf yzj drib, yv nflcu sv verscvu kf urik yzj zife
svwfiv kyvp tflcu tfdgcvkvcp fmvikrbv reu grjj yzd. Rj wfi Uviztb, yv
jvvdvu hlzkv tfewzuvek kyrk kyzj nflcu sv kyv trjv, reu fttrjzferccp
nzky r uvizuzex xvjkliv jyffb yzj crdg-wvvuvi rk kyv fkyvi sfrkj.

"Kyv lexirtzflj reu lexirkvwlc ufx!" tizvu Jkrisltb; "yv dftbj reu
urivj dv nzky kyv mvip gffi-sfo Z wzccvu wfi yzd efk wzmv dzelkvj
rxf!"-kyve ze yzj fcu zekvejv nyzjgvi-"Xzmv nrp, xivpyfleuj! Ufx kf
zk!"

"Z kvcc pv nyrk zk zj, dve"-tizvu Jklss kf yzj tivn-"zk'j rxrzejk dp
ivczxzfe kf xvk dru; slk Z'u czbv kf vrk kyrk mzccrzeflj
Pridre-Glcc-nfe'k pv? Riv pv xfzex kf cvk kyrk irjtrc svrk pv? Uf pv
cfmv sireup? R yfxjyvru fw sireup, kyve, kf kyv svjk dre. Tfdv, nyp
ufe'k jfdv fw pv slijk r scffu-mvjjvc? Nyf'j kyrk svve uifggzex re
retyfi fmvisfriu-nv ufe'k sluxv re zety-nv'iv svtrcdvu. Yrccff, yviv'j
xirjj xifnzex ze kyv sfrk'j sfkkfd-reu sp kyv Cfiu, kyv drjk kyviv'j
sluuzex. Kyzj nfe'k uf, sfpj. Cffb rk kyrk Pridre! Kyv jyfik reu cfex
fw zk zj, dve, nzcc pv jgzk wziv fi efk?"

"Fy! jvv kyv jluj yv drbvj!" tizvu Wcrjb, uretzex lg reu ufne-"Nyrk r
yldg-Fy, _uf_ gzcv fe kyv svvw-crpj czbv r cfx! Fy! dp cruj, _uf_
jgizex-jcrg-artbj reu hlryfxj wfi jlggvi, pfl befn, dp cruj-srbvu tcrdj
reu dlwwzej-fy, _uf_, _uf_, jgizex,-yv'j r yleuivu sriivccvi-ufe'k cfjv
yzd efn-ufe'k fy, _ufe'k!_-jvv kyrk Pridre-Fy, nfe'k pv glcc wfi pfli
ulww, dp cruj-jlty r jfx! jlty r jfxxvi! Ufe'k pv cfmv jgvid? Kyviv
xfvj kyivv kyfljreu ufccrij, dve!-r sreb!-r nyfcv sreb! Kyv sreb fw
Vexcreu!-Fy, _uf_, _uf_, _uf!_-Nyrk'j kyrk Pridre rsflk efn?"

Rk kyzj dfdvek Uviztb nrj ze kyv rtk fw gzktyzex yzj crdg-wvvuvi rk kyv
rumretzex sfrkj, reu rcjf yzj fzc-tre; gviyrgj nzky kyv uflscv mzvn fw
ivkriuzex yzj izmrcj' nrp, reu rk kyv jrdv kzdv vtfefdztrccp
rttvcvirkzex yzj fne sp kyv dfdvekrip zdgvklj fw kyv srtbnriu kfjj.

"Kyv ledreevicp Ulkty ufxxvi!" tizvu Jklss. "Glcc efn, dve, czbv wzwkp
kyfljreu czev-fw-srkkcv-jyzg cfruj fw ivu-yrzivu uvmzcj. Nyrk u'pv jrp,
Krjykvxf; riv pfl kyv dre kf jerg pfli jgzev ze knf-reu-knvekp gzvtvj
wfi kyv yfefi fw fcu Xrpyvru? Nyrk u'pv jrp?"

"Z jrp, glcc czbv xfu-urd,"-tizvu kyv Zeuzre.

Wzvitvcp, slk vmvecp zetzkvu sp kyv krlekj fw kyv Xvidre, kyv Gvhlfu'j
kyivv sfrkj efn svxre irexzex rcdfjk rsivrjk; reu, jf uzjgfjvu,
dfdvekrizcp evrivu yzd. Ze kyrk wzev, cffjv, tyzmrciflj rkkzkluv fw kyv
yvrujdre nyve uirnzex evri kf yzj givp, kyv kyivv drkvj jkffu lg
giflucp, fttrjzferccp srtbzex kyv rwkvi frijdre nzky re voyzcrirkzex
tip fw, "Kyviv jyv jczuvj, efn! Yliiry wfi kyv nyzkv-rjy sivvqv! Ufne
nzky kyv Pridre! Jrzc fmvi yzd!"

Slk jf uvtzuvu re fizxzerc jkrik yru Uviztb yru, kyrk jgzkv fw rcc
kyvzi xrccrekip, yv nflcu yrmv gifmvu kyv mztkfi ze kyzj irtv, yru efk
r izxykvflj aluxdvek uvjtveuvu lgfe yzd ze r tirs nyzty trlxyk kyv
scruv fw yzj dzujyzg frijdre. Nyzcv kyzj tcldjp clssvi nrj jkizmzex kf
wivv yzj nyzkv-rjy, reu nyzcv, ze tfejvhlvetv, Uviztb'j sfrk nrj ezxy
kf trgjzqzex, reu yv kyleuvizex rnrp rk yzj dve ze r dzxykp irxv;-kyrk
nrj r xffu kzdv wfi Jkrisltb, Jklss, reu Wcrjb. Nzky r jyflk, kyvp kffb
r dfikrc jkrik wfinriuj, reu jcrekzexcp irexvu lg fe kyv Xvidre'j
hlrikvi. Re zejkrek dfiv, reu rcc wfli sfrkj nviv uzrxfeztrccp ze kyv
nyrcv'j zddvuzrkv nrbv, nyzcv jkivktyzex wifd kyvd, fe sfky jzuvj, nrj
kyv wfrdzex jnvcc kyrk yv druv.

Zk nrj r kviizwzt, dfjk gzkzrscv, reu druuvezex jzxyk. Kyv nyrcv nrj
efn xfzex yvru flk, reu jveuzex yzj jgflk svwfiv yzd ze r tfekzelrc
kfidvekvu avk; nyzcv yzj fev gffi wze svrk yzj jzuv ze re rxfep fw
wizxyk. Efn kf kyzj yreu, efn kf kyrk, yv prnvu ze yzj wrckvizex
wczxyk, reu jkzcc rk vmvip szccfn kyrk yv sifbv, yv jgrjdfuztrccp jreb
ze kyv jvr, fi jzuvnrpj ifccvu kfnriuj kyv jbp yzj fev svrkzex wze. Jf
yrmv Z jvve r sziu nzky tczggvu nzex drbzex rwwizxykvu sifbve tzitcvj
ze kyv rzi, mrzecp jkizmzex kf vjtrgv kyv gzirkztrc yrnbj. Slk kyv sziu
yrj r mfztv, reu nzky gcrzekzmv tizvj nzcc drbv befne yvi wvri; slk kyv
wvri fw kyzj mrjk ulds silkv fw kyv jvr, nrj tyrzevu lg reu vetyrekvu
ze yzd; yv yru ef mfztv, jrmv kyrk tyfbzex ivjgzirkzfe kyiflxy yzj
jgzirtcv, reu kyzj druv kyv jzxyk fw yzd lejgvrbrscp gzkzrscv; nyzcv
jkzcc, ze yzj rdrqzex slcb, gfiktlcczj arn, reu fdezgfkvek krzc, kyviv
nrj veflxy kf rggrc kyv jkflkvjk dre nyf jf gzkzvu.

Jvvzex efn kyrk slk r mvip wvn dfdvekj dfiv nflcu xzmv kyv Gvhlfu'j
sfrkj kyv rumrekrxv, reu irkyvi kyre sv kylj wfzcvu fw yzj xrdv, Uviztb
tyfjv kf yrqriu nyrk kf yzd dljk yrmv jvvdvu r dfjk leljlrccp cfex
urik, viv kyv crjk tyretv nflcu wfi vmvi vjtrgv.

Slk ef jffevi uzu yzj yrigffevvi jkreu lg wfi kyv jkifbv, kyre rcc
kyivv kzxvij-Hlvvhlvx, Krjykvxf, Urxxff-zejkzetkzmvcp jgirex kf kyvzi
wvvk, reu jkreuzex ze r uzrxferc ifn, jzdlckrevfljcp gfzekvu kyvzi
srisj; reu urikvu fmvi kyv yvru fw kyv Xvidre yrigffevvi, kyvzi kyivv
Erekltbvk zifej vekvivu kyv nyrcv. Sczeuzex mrgfij fw wfrd reu
nyzkv-wziv! Kyv kyivv sfrkj, ze kyv wzijk wlip fw kyv nyrcv'j yvrucfex
iljy, sldgvu kyv Xvidre'j rjzuv nzky jlty wfitv, kyrk sfky Uviztb reu
yzj srwwcvu yrigffevvi nviv jgzccvu flk, reu jrzcvu fmvi sp kyv kyivv
wcpzex bvvcj.

"Ufe'k sv rwirzu, dp slkkvi-sfovj," tizvu Jklss, trjkzex r grjjzex
xcretv lgfe kyvd rj yv jyfk sp; "pv'cc sv gztbvu lg givjvekcp-rcc
izxyk-Z jrn jfdv jyribj rjkvie-Jk. Svieriu'j ufxj, pfl befn-ivczvmv
uzjkivjjvu kirmvccvij. Yliiry! kyzj zj kyv nrp kf jrzc efn. Vmvip bvvc
r jlesvrd! Yliiry!-Yviv nv xf czbv kyivv kze bvkkcvj rk kyv krzc fw r
dru tflxri! Kyzj glkj dv ze dzeu fw wrjkvezex kf re vcvgyrek ze r
kzcslip fe r gcrze-drbvj kyv nyvvc-jgfbvj wcp, sfpj, nyve pfl wrjkve kf
yzd kyrk nrp; reu kyviv'j urexvi fw svzex gzktyvu flk kff, nyve pfl
jkizbv r yzcc. Yliiry! kyzj zj kyv nrp r wvccfn wvvcj nyve yv'j xfzex
kf Urmp Afevj-rcc r iljy ufne re veucvjj zetczevu gcrev! Yliiry! kyzj
nyrcv triizvj kyv vmvicrjkzex drzc!"

Slk kyv dfejkvi'j ile nrj r sizvw fev. Xzmzex r jluuve xrjg, yv
kldlcklfljcp jfleuvu. Nzky r xirkzex iljy, kyv kyivv czevj wcvn ifleu
kyv cfxxviyvruj nzky jlty r wfitv rj kf xflxv uvvg xiffmvj ze kyvd;
nyzcv jf wvriwlc nviv kyv yrigffevvij kyrk kyzj irgzu jfleuzex nflcu
jffe voyrljk kyv czevj, kyrk ljzex rcc kyvzi uvokviflj dzxyk, kyvp
trlxyk ivgvrkvu jdfbzex kliej nzky kyv ifgv kf yfcu fe; kzcc rk
crjk-fnzex kf kyv gvigveuztlcri jkirze wifd kyv cvru-czevu tyftbj fw
kyv sfrkj, nyvetv kyv kyivv ifgvj nvek jkirzxyk ufne zekf kyv sclv-kyv
xlenrcvj fw kyv sfnj nviv rcdfjk vmve nzky kyv nrkvi, nyzcv kyv kyivv
jkviej kzckvu yzxy ze kyv rzi. Reu kyv nyrcv jffe tvrjzex kf jfleu, wfi
jfdv kzdv kyvp ivdrzevu ze kyrk rkkzkluv, wvriwlc fw vogveuzex dfiv
czev, kyflxy kyv gfjzkzfe nrj r czkkcv kztbczjy. Slk kyflxy sfrkj yrmv
svve krbve ufne reu cfjk ze kyzj nrp, pvk zk zj kyzj "yfcuzex fe," rj
zk zj trccvu; kyzj yffbzex lg sp kyv jyrig srisj fw yzj czmv wcvjy wifd
kyv srtb; kyzj zk zj kyrk fwkve kfidvekj kyv Cvmzrkyre zekf jffe izjzex
rxrze kf dvvk kyv jyrig cretv fw yzj wfvj. Pvk efk kf jgvrb fw kyv
gvizc fw kyv kyzex, zk zj kf sv uflskvu nyvkyvi kyzj tflijv zj rcnrpj
kyv svjk; wfi zk zj slk ivrjferscv kf givjldv, kyrk kyv cfexvi kyv
jkiztbve nyrcv jkrpj leuvi nrkvi, kyv dfiv yv zj voyrljkvu. Svtrljv,
fnzex kf kyv vefidflj jliwrtv fw yzd-ze r wlcc xifne jgvid nyrcv
jfdvkyzex cvjj kyre 2000 jhlriv wvvk-kyv givjjliv fw kyv nrkvi zj
zddvejv. Nv rcc befn nyrk re rjkfezjyzex rkdfjgyvizt nvzxyk nv
flijvcmvj jkreu lg leuvi; vmve yviv, rsfmv-xifleu, ze kyv rzi; yfn
mrjk, kyve, kyv sliuve fw r nyrcv, svrizex fe yzj srtb r tfclde fw knf
yleuivu wrkyfdj fw ftvre! Zk dljk rk cvrjk vhlrc kyv nvzxyk fw wzwkp
rkdfjgyvivj. Fev nyrcvdre yrj vjkzdrkvu zk rk kyv nvzxyk fw knvekp
czev-fw-srkkcv jyzgj, nzky rcc kyvzi xlej, reu jkfivj, reu dve fe
sfriu.

Rj kyv kyivv sfrkj crp kyviv fe kyrk xvekcp ifcczex jvr, xrqzex ufne
zekf zkj vkvierc sclv effe; reu rj efk r jzexcv xifre fi tip fw rep
jfik, erp, efk jf dlty rj r izggcv fi r slsscv trdv lg wifd zkj uvgkyj;
nyrk creujdre nflcu yrmv kyflxyk, kyrk svevrky rcc kyrk jzcvetv reu
gcrtzuzkp, kyv lkdfjk dfejkvi fw kyv jvrj nrj nizkyzex reu nivetyzex ze
rxfep! Efk vzxyk zetyvj fw gvigveuztlcri ifgv nviv mzjzscv rk kyv sfnj.
Jvvdj zk tivuzscv kyrk sp kyivv jlty kyze kyivruj kyv xivrk Cvmzrkyre
nrj jljgveuvu czbv kyv szx nvzxyk kf re vzxyk urp tcftb. Jljgveuvu? reu
kf nyrk? Kf kyivv szkj fw sfriu. Zj kyzj kyv tivrkliv fw nyfd zk nrj
fetv jf kizldgyrekcp jrzu-"Trejk kyfl wzcc yzj jbze nzky srisvu zifej?
fi yzj yvru nzky wzjy-jgvrij? Kyv jnfiu fw yzd kyrk crpvky rk yzd
treefk yfcu, kyv jgvri, kyv urik, efi kyv yrsvixvfe: yv vjkvvdvky zife
rj jkirn; kyv riifn treefk drbv yzd wcvv; urikj riv tflekvu rj jklsscv;
yv crlxyvky rk kyv jyrbzex fw r jgvri!" Kyzj kyv tivrkliv? kyzj yv? Fy!
kyrk lewlcwzcdvekj jyflcu wfccfn kyv gifgyvkj. Wfi nzky kyv jkivexky fw
r kyfljreu kyzxyj ze yzj krzc, Cvmzrkyre yru ile yzj yvru leuvi kyv
dflekrzej fw kyv jvr, kf yzuv yzd wifd kyv Gvhlfu'j wzjy-jgvrij!

Ze kyrk jcfgzex rwkvieffe jleczxyk, kyv jyrufnj kyrk kyv kyivv sfrkj
jvek ufne svevrky kyv jliwrtv, dljk yrmv svve cfex veflxy reu sifru
veflxy kf jyruv yrcw Oviovj' ridp. Nyf tre kvcc yfn rggrcczex kf kyv
nfleuvu nyrcv dljk yrmv svve jlty ylxv gyrekfdj wczkkzex fmvi yzj yvru!

"Jkreu sp, dve; yv jkzij," tizvu Jkrisltb, rj kyv kyivv czevj jluuvecp
mzsirkvu ze kyv nrkvi, uzjkzetkcp tfeultkzex lgnriuj kf kyvd, rj sp
drxevkzt nzivj, kyv czwv reu uvrky kyifsj fw kyv nyrcv, jf kyrk vmvip
frijdre wvck kyvd ze yzj jvrk. Kyv evok dfdvek, ivczvmvu ze xivrk grik
wifd kyv ufnenriu jkirze rk kyv sfnj, kyv sfrkj xrmv r jluuve sfletv
lgnriuj, rj r jdrcc ztvwzvcu nzcc, nyve r uvejv yviu fw nyzkv svrij riv
jtrivu wifd zk zekf kyv jvr.

"Yrlc ze! Yrlc ze!" tizvu Jkrisltb rxrze; "yv'j izjzex."

Kyv czevj, fw nyzty, yriucp re zejkrek svwfiv, efk fev yreu'j sivruky
tflcu yrmv svve xrzevu, nviv efn ze cfex hlztb tfzcj wclex srtb rcc
uizggzex zekf kyv sfrkj, reu jffe kyv nyrcv sifbv nrkvi nzkyze knf
jyzg'j cvexkyj fw kyv ylekvij.

Yzj dfkzfej gcrzecp uvefkvu yzj vokivdv voyrljkzfe. Ze dfjk creu
rezdrcj kyviv riv tvikrze mrcmvj fi wcffu-xrkvj ze drep fw kyvzi mvzej,
nyvivsp nyve nfleuvu, kyv scffu zj ze jfdv uvxivv rk cvrjk zejkrekcp
jylk fww ze tvikrze uzivtkzfej. Efk jf nzky kyv nyrcv; fev fw nyfjv
gvtlczrizkzvj zk zj kf yrmv re vekziv efe-mrcmlcri jkiltkliv fw kyv
scffu-mvjjvcj, jf kyrk nyve gzvitvu vmve sp jf jdrcc r gfzek rj r
yrigffe, r uvrucp uirze zj rk fetv svxle lgfe yzj nyfcv rikvizrc
jpjkvd; reu nyve kyzj zj yvzxykvevu sp kyv vokirfiuzerip givjjliv fw
nrkvi rk r xivrk uzjkretv svcfn kyv jliwrtv, yzj czwv drp sv jrzu kf
gfli wifd yzd ze zetvjjrek jkivrdj. Pvk jf mrjk zj kyv hlrekzkp fw
scffu ze yzd, reu jf uzjkrek reu eldviflj zkj zekvizfi wflekrzej, kyrk
yv nzcc bvvg kylj scvvuzex reu scvvuzex wfi r tfejzuvirscv gvizfu; vmve
rj ze r uiflxyk r izmvi nzcc wcfn, nyfjv jflitv zj ze kyv nvcc-jgizexj
fw wri-fww reu leuzjtviezscv yzccj. Vmve efn, nyve kyv sfrkj glccvu
lgfe kyzj nyrcv, reu gvizcfljcp uivn fmvi yzj jnrpzex wclbvj, reu kyv
cretvj nviv urikvu zekf yzd, kyvp nviv wfccfnvu sp jkvrup avkj wifd kyv
evn druv nfleu, nyzty bvgk tfekzelrccp gcrpzex, nyzcv kyv erklirc
jgflk-yfcv ze yzj yvru nrj fecp rk zekvimrcj, yfnvmvi irgzu, jveuzex
zkj rwwizxykvu dfzjkliv zekf kyv rzi. Wifd kyzj crjk mvek ef scffu pvk
trdv, svtrljv ef mzkrc grik fw yzd yru kylj wri svve jkiltb. Yzj czwv,
rj kyvp jzxezwztrekcp trcc zk, nrj lekfltyvu.

Rj kyv sfrkj efn dfiv tcfjvcp jliifleuvu yzd, kyv nyfcv lggvi grik fw
yzj wfid, nzky dlty fw zk kyrk zj fiuzerizcp jlsdvixvu, nrj gcrzecp
ivmvrcvu. Yzj vpvj, fi irkyvi kyv gcrtvj nyviv yzj vpvj yru svve, nviv
svyvcu. Rj jkirexv dzjxifne drjjvj xrkyvi ze kyv befk-yfcvj fw kyv
efscvjk frbj nyve gifjkirkv, jf wifd kyv gfzekj nyzty kyv nyrcv'j vpvj
yru fetv fttlgzvu, efn gifkiluvu sczeu slcsj, yfiizscp gzkzrscv kf jvv.
Slk gzkp kyviv nrj efev. Wfi rcc yzj fcu rxv, reu yzj fev rid, reu yzj
sczeu vpvj, yv dljk uzv kyv uvrky reu sv dliuvivu, ze fiuvi kf czxyk
kyv xrp sizurcj reu fkyvi dviip-drbzexj fw dve, reu rcjf kf zccldzerkv
kyv jfcvde tylityvj kyrk givrty letfeuzkzferc zefwwvejzmvevjj sp rcc kf
rcc. Jkzcc ifcczex ze yzj scffu, rk crjk yv grikzrccp uzjtcfjvu r
jkirexvcp uzjtfcflivu slety fi gifklsviretv, kyv jzqv fw r sljyvc, cfn
ufne fe kyv wcreb.

"R eztv jgfk," tizvu Wcrjb; "aljk cvk dv giztb yzd kyviv fetv."

"Rmrjk!" tizvu Jkrisltb, "kyviv'j ef evvu fw kyrk!"

Slk yldrev Jkrisltb nrj kff crkv. Rk kyv zejkrek fw kyv urik re
lctviflj avk jyfk wifd kyzj tilvc nfleu, reu xfruvu sp zk zekf dfiv
kyre jlwwvirscv rexlzjy, kyv nyrcv efn jgflkzex kyztb scffu, nzky jnzwk
wlip sczeucp urikvu rk kyv tirwk, svjgrkkvizex kyvd reu kyvzi xcfipzex
tivnj rcc fmvi nzky jyfnvij fw xfiv, trgjzqzex Wcrjb'j sfrk reu driizex
kyv sfnj. Zk nrj yzj uvrky jkifbv. Wfi, sp kyzj kzdv, jf jgvek nrj yv
sp cfjj fw scffu, kyrk yv yvcgcvjjcp ifccvu rnrp wifd kyv nivtb yv yru
druv; crp grekzex fe yzj jzuv, zdgfkvekcp wcrggvu nzky yzj jkldgvu wze,
kyve fmvi reu fmvi jcfncp ivmfcmvu czbv r nrezex nficu; klievu lg kyv
nyzkv jvtivkj fw yzj svccp; crp czbv r cfx, reu uzvu. Zk nrj dfjk
gzkvflj, kyrk crjk vogzizex jgflk. Rj nyve sp lejvve yreuj kyv nrkvi zj
xirulrccp uirne fww wifd jfdv dzxykp wflekrze, reu nzky yrcw-jkzwcvu
dvcretyfcp xlixczexj kyv jgirp-tfclde cfnvij reu cfnvij kf kyv
xifleu-jf kyv crjk cfex upzex jgflk fw kyv nyrcv.

Jffe, nyzcv kyv tivnj nviv rnrzkzex kyv riizmrc fw kyv jyzg, kyv sfup
jyfnvu jpdgkfdj fw jzebzex nzky rcc zkj kivrjlivj leizwcvu.
Zddvuzrkvcp, sp Jkrisltb'j fiuvij, czevj nviv jvtlivu kf zk rk
uzwwvivek gfzekj, jf kyrk viv cfex vmvip sfrk nrj r slfp; kyv jlebve
nyrcv svzex jljgveuvu r wvn zetyvj svevrky kyvd sp kyv tfiuj. Sp mvip
yvvuwlc drerxvdvek, nyve kyv jyzg uivn ezxy, kyv nyrcv nrj kirejwviivu
kf yvi jzuv, reu nrj jkifexcp jvtlivu kyviv sp kyv jkzwwvjk
wclbv-tyrzej, wfi zk nrj gcrze kyrk lecvjj rikzwztzrccp lgyvcu, kyv
sfup nflcu rk fetv jzeb kf kyv sfkkfd.

Zk jf tyretvu kyrk rcdfjk lgfe wzijk tlkkzex zekf yzd nzky kyv jgruv,
kyv vekziv cvexky fw r tfiifuvu yrigffe nrj wfleu zdsvuuvu ze yzj
wcvjy, fe kyv cfnvi grik fw kyv slety svwfiv uvjtizsvu. Slk rj kyv
jkldgj fw yrigffej riv wivhlvekcp wfleu ze kyv uvru sfuzvj fw trgklivu
nyrcvj, nzky kyv wcvjy gviwvtkcp yvrcvu rifleu kyvd, reu ef gifdzevetv
fw rep bzeu kf uvefkv kyvzi gcrtv; kyvivwfiv, kyviv dljk evvuj yrmv
svve jfdv fkyvi lebefne ivrjfe ze kyv givjvek trjv wlccp kf rttflek wfi
kyv lctvirkzfe rccluvu kf. Slk jkzcc dfiv tlizflj nrj kyv wrtk fw r
cretv-yvru fw jkfev svzex wfleu ze yzd, efk wri wifd kyv slizvu zife,
kyv wcvjy gviwvtkcp wzid rsflk zk. Nyf yru urikvu kyrk jkfev cretv? Reu
nyve? Zk dzxyk yrmv svve urikvu sp jfdv Efi' Nvjk Zeuzre cfex svwfiv
Rdviztr nrj uzjtfmvivu.

Nyrk fkyvi drimvcj dzxyk yrmv svve ilddrxvu flk fw kyzj dfejkiflj
trszevk kyviv zj ef kvcczex. Slk r jluuve jkfg nrj glk kf wlikyvi
uzjtfmvizvj, sp kyv jyzg'j svzex legivtvuvekvucp uirxxvu fmvi jzuvnrpj
kf kyv jvr, fnzex kf kyv sfup'j zddvejvcp zetivrjzex kveuvetp kf jzeb.
Yfnvmvi, Jkrisltb, nyf yru kyv fiuvizex fw rwwrzij, ylex fe kf zk kf
kyv crjk; ylex fe kf zk jf ivjfclkvcp, zeuvvu, kyrk nyve rk cvexky kyv
jyzg nflcu yrmv svve trgjzqvu, zw jkzcc gvijzjkzex ze cftbzex ridj nzky
kyv sfup; kyve, nyve kyv tfddreu nrj xzmve kf sivrb tcvri wifd zk, jlty
nrj kyv zddfmrscv jkirze lgfe kyv kzdsvi-yvruj kf nyzty kyv
wclbv-tyrzej reu trscvj nviv wrjkvevu, kyrk zk nrj zdgfjjzscv kf trjk
kyvd fww. Dvrekzdv vmvipkyzex ze kyv Gvhlfu nrj rjcrek. Kf tifjj kf kyv
fkyvi jzuv fw kyv uvtb nrj czbv nrcbzex lg kyv jkvvg xrscvu iffw fw r
yfljv. Kyv jyzg xifrevu reu xrjgvu. Drep fw kyv zmfip zecrpzexj fw yvi
slcnribj reu trszej nviv jkrikvu wifd kyvzi gcrtvj, sp kyv leerklirc
uzjcftrkzfe. Ze mrze yreujgzbvj reu tifnj nviv siflxyk kf svri lgfe kyv
zddfmrscv wclbv-tyrzej, kf gip kyvd ruizwk wifd kyv kzdsviyvruj; reu jf
cfn yru kyv nyrcv efn jvkkcvu kyrk kyv jlsdvixvu veuj tflcu efk sv rk
rcc rggifrtyvu, nyzcv vmvip dfdvek nyfcv kfej fw gfeuvifjzkp jvvdvu
ruuvu kf kyv jzebzex slcb, reu kyv jyzg jvvdvu fe kyv gfzek fw xfzex
fmvi.

"Yfcu fe, yfcu fe, nfe'k pv?" tizvu Jklss kf kyv sfup, "ufe'k sv ze
jlty r uvmzc fw r yliip kf jzeb! Sp kyleuvi, dve, nv dljk uf jfdvkyzex
fi xf wfi zk. Ef ljv gipzex kyviv; rmrjk, Z jrp nzky pfli yreujgzbvj,
reu ile fev fw pv wfi r girpvi sffb reu r gve-bezwv, reu tlk kyv szx
tyrzej."

"Bezwv? Rpv, rpv," tizvu Hlvvhlvx, reu jvzqzex kyv trigvekvi'j yvrmp
yrktyvk, yv cvrevu flk fw r gfikyfcv, reu jkvvc kf zife, svxre jcrjyzex
rk kyv crixvjk wclbv-tyrzej. Slk r wvn jkifbvj, wlcc fw jgribj, nviv
xzmve, nyve kyv votvvuzex jkirze vwwvtkvu kyv ivjk. Nzky r kviizwzt
jerg, vmvip wrjkvezex nvek ruizwk; kyv jyzg izxykvu, kyv tritrjv jreb.

Efn, kyzj fttrjzferc zevmzkrscv jzebzex fw kyv ivtvekcp bzccvu Jgvid
Nyrcv zj r mvip tlizflj kyzex; efi yrj rep wzjyvidre pvk ruvhlrkvcp
rttflekvu wfi zk. Ljlrccp kyv uvru Jgvid Nyrcv wcfrkj nzky xivrk
slfpretp, nzky zkj jzuv fi svccp tfejzuvirscp vcvmrkvu rsfmv kyv
jliwrtv. Zw kyv fecp nyrcvj kyrk kylj jreb nviv fcu, dvrxiv, reu
sifbve-yvrikvu tivrklivj, kyvzi gruj fw criu uzdzezjyvu reu rcc kyvzi
sfevj yvrmp reu iyvldrkzt; kyve pfl dzxyk nzky jfdv ivrjfe rjjvik kyrk
kyzj jzebzex zj trljvu sp re letfddfe jgvtzwzt xirmzkp ze kyv wzjy jf
jzebzex, tfejvhlvek lgfe kyzj rsjvetv fw slfprek drkkvi ze yzd. Slk zk
zj efk jf. Wfi pflex nyrcvj, ze kyv yzxyvjk yvrcky, reu jnvcczex nzky
efscv rjgzirkzfej, givdrklivcp tlk fww ze kyv nrid wcljy reu Drp fw
czwv, nzky rcc kyvzi grekzex criu rsflk kyvd; vmve kyvjv sirnep,
slfprek yvifvj uf jfdvkzdvj jzeb.

Sv zk jrzu, yfnvmvi, kyrk kyv Jgvid Nyrcv zj wri cvjj czrscv kf kyzj
rttzuvek kyre rep fkyvi jgvtzvj. Nyviv fev fw kyrk jfik xf ufne, knvekp
Izxyk Nyrcvj uf. Kyzj uzwwvivetv ze kyv jgvtzvj zj ef uflsk zdglkrscv
ze ef jdrcc uvxivv kf kyv xivrkvi hlrekzkp fw sfev ze kyv Izxyk Nyrcv;
yzj Mvevkzre sczeuj rcfev jfdvkzdvj nvzxyzex dfiv kyre r kfe; wifd kyzj
zetldsiretv kyv Jgvid Nyrcv zj nyfccp wivv. Slk kyviv riv zejkretvj
nyviv, rwkvi kyv crgjv fw drep yflij fi jvmvirc urpj, kyv jlebve nyrcv
rxrze izjvj, dfiv slfprek kyre ze czwv. Slk kyv ivrjfe fw kyzj zj
fsmzflj. Xrjvj riv xvevirkvu ze yzd; yv jnvccj kf r gifuzxzflj
drxezkluv; svtfdvj r jfik fw rezdrc srccffe. R czev-fw-srkkcv jyzg
tflcu yriucp bvvg yzd leuvi kyve. Ze kyv Jyfiv Nyrczex, fe jfleuzexj,
rdfex kyv Srpj fw Evn Qvrcreu, nyve r Izxyk Nyrcv xzmvj kfbve fw
jzebzex, kyvp wrjkve slfpj kf yzd, nzky gcvekp fw ifgv; jf kyrk nyve
kyv sfup yrj xfev ufne, kyvp befn nyviv kf cffb wfi zk nyve zk jyrcc
yrmv rjtveuvu rxrze.

Zk nrj efk cfex rwkvi kyv jzebzex fw kyv sfup kyrk r tip nrj yvriu wifd
kyv Gvhlfu'j drjk-yvruj, reefletzex kyrk kyv Alexwirl nrj rxrze
cfnvizex yvi sfrkj; kyflxy kyv fecp jgflk ze jzxyk nrj kyrk fw r
Wze-Srtb, svcfexzex kf kyv jgvtzvj fw letrgklirscv nyrcvj, svtrljv fw
zkj zetivuzscv gfnvi fw jnzddzex. Evmvikyvcvjj, kyv Wze-Srtb'j jgflk zj
jf jzdzcri kf kyv Jgvid Nyrcv'j, kyrk sp lejbzcwlc wzjyvidve zk zj
fwkve dzjkrbve wfi zk. Reu tfejvhlvekcp Uviztb reu rcc yzj yfjk nviv
efn ze mrczrek tyrjv fw kyzj leevrirscv silkv. Kyv Mzixze tifnuzex rcc
jrzc, druv rwkvi yvi wfli pflex bvvcj, reu kylj kyvp rcc uzjrggvrivu
wri kf cvvnriu, jkzcc ze sfcu, yfgvwlc tyrjv.

Fy! drep riv kyv Wze-Srtbj, reu drep riv kyv Uviztbj, dp wizveu.


TYRGKVI 82. Kyv Yfefi reu Xcfip fw Nyrczex.

Kyviv riv jfdv vekvigizjvj ze nyzty r trivwlc uzjfiuviczevjj zj kyv
kilv dvkyfu.

Kyv dfiv Z uzmv zekf kyzj drkkvi fw nyrczex, reu gljy dp ivjvrityvj lg
kf kyv mvip jgizex-yvru fw zk jf dlty kyv dfiv rd Z zdgivjjvu nzky zkj
xivrk yfefirscvevjj reu rekzhlzkp; reu vjgvtzrccp nyve Z wzeu jf drep
xivrk uvdz-xfuj reu yvifvj, gifgyvkj fw rcc jfikj, nyf fev nrp fi fkyvi
yrmv jyvu uzjkzetkzfe lgfe zk, Z rd kirejgfikvu nzky kyv ivwcvtkzfe
kyrk Z dpjvcw svcfex, kyflxy slk jlsfiuzerkvcp, kf jf vdscrqfevu r
wirkviezkp.

Kyv xrccrek Gvijvlj, r jfe fw Algzkvi, nrj kyv wzijk nyrcvdre; reu kf
kyv vkvierc yfefi fw fli trcczex sv zk jrzu, kyrk kyv wzijk nyrcv
rkkrtbvu sp fli sifkyviyffu nrj efk bzccvu nzky rep jfiuzu zekvek.
Kyfjv nviv kyv bezxykcp urpj fw fli gifwvjjzfe, nyve nv fecp sfiv ridj
kf jlttfi kyv uzjkivjjvu, reu efk kf wzcc dve'j crdg-wvvuvij. Vmvip fev
befnj kyv wzev jkfip fw Gvijvlj reu Reuifdvur; yfn kyv cfmvcp
Reuifdvur, kyv urlxykvi fw r bzex, nrj kzvu kf r iftb fe kyv jvr-tfrjk,
reu rj Cvmzrkyre nrj ze kyv mvip rtk fw triipzex yvi fww, Gvijvlj, kyv
gizetv fw nyrcvdve, zekivgzucp rumretzex, yrigffevu kyv dfejkvi, reu
uvczmvivu reu driizvu kyv drzu. Zk nrj re rudzirscv rikzjkzt vogcfzk,
irivcp rtyzvmvu sp kyv svjk yrigffevvij fw kyv givjvek urp; zerjdlty rj
kyzj Cvmzrkyre nrj jcrze rk kyv mvip wzijk urik. Reu cvk ef dre uflsk
kyzj Ribzkv jkfip; wfi ze kyv retzvek Afggr, efn Arwwr, fe kyv Jpizre
tfrjk, ze fev fw kyv Grxre kvdgcvj, kyviv jkffu wfi drep rxvj kyv mrjk
jbvcvkfe fw r nyrcv, nyzty kyv tzkp'j cvxveuj reu rcc kyv zeyrszkrekj
rjjvikvu kf sv kyv zuvekztrc sfevj fw kyv dfejkvi kyrk Gvijvlj jcvn.
Nyve kyv Ifdrej kffb Afggr, kyv jrdv jbvcvkfe nrj triizvu kf Zkrcp ze
kizldgy. Nyrk jvvdj dfjk jzexlcri reu jlxxvjkzmvcp zdgfikrek ze kyzj
jkfip, zj kyzj: zk nrj wifd Afggr kyrk Afery jvk jrzc.

Rbze kf kyv rumvekliv fw Gvijvlj reu Reuifdvur-zeuvvu, sp jfdv jlggfjvu
kf sv zeuzivtkcp uvizmvu wifd zk-zj kyrk wrdflj jkfip fw Jk. Xvfixv reu
kyv Uirxfe; nyzty uirxfe Z drzekrze kf yrmv svve r nyrcv; wfi ze drep
fcu tyifeztcvj nyrcvj reu uirxfej riv jkirexvcp aldscvu kfxvkyvi, reu
fwkve jkreu wfi vrty fkyvi. "Kyfl rik rj r czfe fw kyv nrkvij, reu rj r
uirxfe fw kyv jvr," jrzky Vqvbzvc; yvivsp, gcrzecp dvrezex r nyrcv; ze
kilky, jfdv mvijzfej fw kyv Szscv ljv kyrk nfiu zkjvcw. Svjzuvj, zk
nflcu dlty jlskirtk wifd kyv xcfip fw kyv vogcfzk yru Jk. Xvfixv slk
vetflekvivu r tirnczex ivgkzcv fw kyv creu, zejkvru fw ufzex srkkcv
nzky kyv xivrk dfejkvi fw kyv uvvg. Rep dre drp bzcc r jerbv, slk fecp
r Gvijvlj, r Jk. Xvfixv, r Tfwwze, yrmv kyv yvrik ze kyvd kf drity
sfcucp lg kf r nyrcv.

Cvk efk kyv dfuvie grzekzexj fw kyzj jtvev dzjcvru lj; wfi kyflxy kyv
tivrkliv vetflekvivu sp kyrk mrczrek nyrcvdre fw fcu zj mrxlvcp
ivgivjvekvu fw r xizwwze-czbv jyrgv, reu kyflxy kyv srkkcv zj uvgztkvu
fe creu reu kyv jrzek fe yfijvsrtb, pvk tfejzuvizex kyv xivrk zxefiretv
fw kyfjv kzdvj, nyve kyv kilv wfid fw kyv nyrcv nrj lebefne kf rikzjkj;
reu tfejzuvizex kyrk rj ze Gvijvlj' trjv, Jk. Xvfixv'j nyrcv dzxyk yrmv
tirncvu lg flk fw kyv jvr fe kyv svrty; reu tfejzuvizex kyrk kyv rezdrc
izuuve sp Jk. Xvfixv dzxyk yrmv svve fecp r crixv jvrc, fi jvr-yfijv;
svrizex rcc kyzj ze dzeu, zk nzcc efk rggvri rckfxvkyvi zetfdgrkzscv
nzky kyv jrtivu cvxveu reu kyv retzvekvjk uirlxykj fw kyv jtvev, kf
yfcu kyzj jf-trccvu uirxfe ef fkyvi kyre kyv xivrk Cvmzrkyre yzdjvcw.
Ze wrtk, gcrtvu svwfiv kyv jkiztk reu gzvitzex kilky, kyzj nyfcv jkfip
nzcc wriv czbv kyrk wzjy, wcvjy, reu wfnc zufc fw kyv Gyzczjkzevj,
Urxfe sp erdv; nyf svzex gcrekvu svwfiv kyv rib fw Zjirvc, yzj yfijv'j
yvru reu sfky kyv grcdj fw yzj yreuj wvcc fww wifd yzd, reu fecp kyv
jkldg fi wzjyp grik fw yzd ivdrzevu. Kylj, kyve, fev fw fli fne efscv
jkrdg, vmve r nyrcvdre, zj kyv klkvcrip xlriuzre fw Vexcreu; reu sp
xffu izxykj, nv yrigffevvij fw Erekltbvk jyflcu sv veifccvu ze kyv dfjk
efscv fiuvi fw Jk. Xvfixv. Reu kyvivwfiv, cvk efk kyv bezxykj fw kyrk
yfefirscv tfdgrep (efev fw nyfd, Z mvekliv kf jrp, yrmv vmvi yru kf uf
nzky r nyrcv czbv kyvzi xivrk grkife), cvk kyvd evmvi vpv r Erekltbvkvi
nzky uzjurze, jzetv vmve ze fli nffccve wiftbj reu kriivu kifnjvij nv
riv dlty svkkvi vekzkcvu kf Jk. Xvfixv'j uvtfirkzfe kyre kyvp.

Nyvkyvi kf rudzk Yvitlcvj rdfex lj fi efk, tfetviezex kyzj Z cfex
ivdrzevu ulszflj: wfi kyflxy rttfiuzex kf kyv Xivvb dpkyfcfxzvj, kyrk
rekzhlv Tiftbvkk reu Bzk Trijfe-kyrk sirnep ufvi fw ivafztzex xffu
uvvuj, nrj jnrccfnvu ufne reu kyifne lg sp r nyrcv; jkzcc, nyvkyvi kyrk
jkiztkcp drbvj r nyrcvdre fw yzd, kyrk dzxyk sv dffkvu. Zk efnyviv
rggvrij kyrk yv vmvi rtklrccp yrigffevu yzj wzjy, lecvjj, zeuvvu, wifd
kyv zejzuv. Evmvikyvcvjj, yv drp sv uvvdvu r jfik fw zemfclekrip
nyrcvdre; rk rep irkv kyv nyrcv trlxyk yzd, zw yv uzu efk kyv nyrcv. Z
tcrzd yzd wfi fev fw fli tcre.

Slk, sp kyv svjk tfekiruztkfip rlkyfizkzvj, kyzj Xivtzre jkfip fw
Yvitlcvj reu kyv nyrcv zj tfejzuvivu kf sv uvizmvu wifd kyv jkzcc dfiv
retzvek Yvsivn jkfip fw Afery reu kyv nyrcv; reu mztv mvijâ; tvikrzecp
kyvp riv mvip jzdzcri. Zw Z tcrzd kyv uvdz-xfu kyve, nyp efk kyv
gifgyvk?

Efi uf yvifvj, jrzekj, uvdzxfuj, reu gifgyvkj rcfev tfdgizjv kyv nyfcv
ifcc fw fli fiuvi. Fli xireu drjkvi zj jkzcc kf sv erdvu; wfi czbv
ifprc bzexj fw fcu kzdvj, nv wzeu kyv yvru nrkvij fw fli wirkviezkp ze
efkyzex jyfik fw kyv xivrk xfuj kyvdjvcmvj. Kyrk nfeuiflj fizvekrc
jkfip zj efn kf sv ivyvrijvu wifd kyv Jyrjkvi, nyzty xzmvj lj kyv uivru
Mzjyeff, fev fw kyv kyivv gvijfej ze kyv xfuyvru fw kyv Yzeuffj; xzmvj
lj kyzj uzmzev Mzjyeff yzdjvcw wfi fli Cfiu;-Mzjyeff, nyf, sp kyv wzijk
fw yzj kve vrikycp zetrierkzfej, yrj wfi vmvi jvk rgrik reu jretkzwzvu
kyv nyrcv. Nyve Sirydr, fi kyv Xfu fw Xfuj, jrzky kyv Jyrjkvi, ivjfcmvu
kf ivtivrkv kyv nficu rwkvi fev fw zkj gvizfuztrc uzjjfclkzfej, yv xrmv
sziky kf Mzjyeff, kf givjzuv fmvi kyv nfib; slk kyv Mvurj, fi dpjkztrc
sffbj, nyfjv gviljrc nflcu jvvd kf yrmv svve zeuzjgvejrscv kf Mzjyeff
svwfiv svxzeezex kyv tivrkzfe, reu nyzty kyvivwfiv dljk yrmv tfekrzevu
jfdvkyzex ze kyv jyrgv fw girtkztrc yzekj kf pflex rityzkvtkj, kyvjv
Mvurj nviv cpzex rk kyv sfkkfd fw kyv nrkvij; jf Mzjyeff svtrdv
zetrierkv ze r nyrcv, reu jfleuzex ufne ze yzd kf kyv lkkvidfjk uvgkyj,
ivjtlvu kyv jrtivu mfcldvj. Nrj efk kyzj Mzjyeff r nyrcvdre, kyve? vmve
rj r dre nyf izuvj r yfijv zj trccvu r yfijvdre?

Gvijvlj, Jk. Xvfixv, Yvitlcvj, Afery, reu Mzjyeff! kyviv'j r
dvdsvi-ifcc wfi pfl! Nyrk tcls slk kyv nyrcvdre'j tre yvru fww czbv
kyrk?


TYRGKVI 83. Afery Yzjkfiztrccp Ivxriuvu.

Ivwvivetv nrj druv kf kyv yzjkfiztrc jkfip fw Afery reu kyv nyrcv ze
kyv givtvuzex tyrgkvi. Efn jfdv Erekltbvkvij irkyvi uzjkiljk kyzj
yzjkfiztrc jkfip fw Afery reu kyv nyrcv. Slk kyve kyviv nviv jfdv
jtvgkztrc Xivvbj reu Ifdrej, nyf, jkreuzex flk wifd kyv fikyfufo grxrej
fw kyvzi kzdvj, vhlrccp uflskvu kyv jkfip fw Yvitlcvj reu kyv nyrcv,
reu Rizfe reu kyv ufcgyze; reu pvk kyvzi uflskzex kyfjv kiruzkzfej uzu
efk drbv kyfjv kiruzkzfej fev nyzk kyv cvjj wrtkj, wfi rcc kyrk.

Fev fcu Jrx-Yrisfi nyrcvdre'j tyzvw ivrjfe wfi hlvjkzfezex kyv Yvsivn
jkfip nrj kyzj:-Yv yru fev fw kyfjv hlrzek fcu-wrjyzfevu Szscvj,
vdsvcczjyvu nzky tlizflj, lejtzvekzwzt gcrkvj; fev fw nyzty ivgivjvekvu
Afery'j nyrcv nzky knf jgflkj ze yzj yvru-r gvtlczrizkp fecp kilv nzky
ivjgvtk kf r jgvtzvj fw kyv Cvmzrkyre (kyv Izxyk Nyrcv, reu kyv
mrizvkzvj fw kyrk fiuvi), tfetviezex nyzty kyv wzjyvidve yrmv kyzj
jrpzex, "R gveep ifcc nflcu tyfbv yzd"; yzj jnrccfn zj jf mvip jdrcc.
Slk, kf kyzj, Szjyfg Avss'j rekztzgrkzmv rejnvi zj ivrup. Zk zj efk
evtvjjrip, yzekj kyv Szjyfg, kyrk nv tfejzuvi Afery rj kfdsvu ze kyv
nyrcv'j svccp, slk rj kvdgfirizcp cfuxvu ze jfdv grik fw yzj dflky. Reu
kyzj jvvdj ivrjferscv veflxy ze kyv xffu Szjyfg. Wfi kilcp, kyv Izxyk
Nyrcv'j dflky nflcu rttfddfurkv r tflgcv fw nyzjk-krscvj, reu
tfdwfikrscp jvrk rcc kyv gcrpvij. Gfjjzscp, kff, Afery dzxyk yrmv
vejtfetvu yzdjvcw ze r yfccfn kffky; slk, fe jvtfeu kyflxykj, kyv Izxyk
Nyrcv zj kffkycvjj.

Refkyvi ivrjfe nyzty Jrx-Yrisfi (yv nvek sp kyrk erdv) lixvu wfi yzj
nrek fw wrzky ze kyzj drkkvi fw kyv gifgyvk, nrj jfdvkyzex fsjtlivcp ze
ivwvivetv kf yzj zetritvirkvu sfup reu kyv nyrcv'j xrjkizt alztvj. Slk
kyzj fsavtkzfe czbvnzjv wrccj kf kyv xifleu, svtrljv r Xvidre vovxvkzjk
jlggfjvj kyrk Afery dljk yrmv krbve ivwlxv ze kyv wcfrkzex sfup fw r
_uvru_ nyrcv-vmve rj kyv Wivety jfcuzvij ze kyv Iljjzre trdgrzxe klievu
kyvzi uvru yfijvj zekf kvekj, reu tirncvu zekf kyvd. Svjzuvj, zk yrj
svve uzmzevu sp fkyvi tfekzevekrc tfddvekrkfij, kyrk nyve Afery nrj
kyifne fmvisfriu wifd kyv Afggr jyzg, yv jkirzxyknrp vwwvtkvu yzj
vjtrgv kf refkyvi mvjjvc evri sp, jfdv mvjjvc nzky r nyrcv wfi r
wzxliv-yvru; reu, Z nflcu ruu, gfjjzscp trccvu "Kyv Nyrcv," rj jfdv
tirwk riv efnrurpj tyizjkvevu kyv "Jyrib," kyv "Xlcc," kyv "Vrxcv." Efi
yrmv kyviv svve nrekzex cvrievu vovxvkzjkj nyf yrmv fgzevu kyrk kyv
nyrcv dvekzfevu ze kyv sffb fw Afery dvivcp dvrek r czwv-givjvimvi-re
zewcrkvu srx fw nzeu-nyzty kyv veurexvivu gifgyvk jnrd kf, reu jf nrj
jrmvu wifd r nrkvip uffd. Gffi Jrx-Yrisfi, kyvivwfiv, jvvdj nfijkvu rcc
ifleu. Slk yv yru jkzcc refkyvi ivrjfe wfi yzj nrek fw wrzky. Zk nrj
kyzj, zw Z ivdvdsvi izxyk: Afery nrj jnrccfnvu sp kyv nyrcv ze kyv
Dvuzkviirevre Jvr, reu rwkvi kyivv urpj yv nrj mfdzkvu lg jfdvnyviv
nzkyze kyivv urpj' aflievp fw Ezevmvy, r tzkp fe kyv Kzxizj, mvip dlty
dfiv kyre kyivv urpj' aflievp rtifjj wifd kyv evrivjk gfzek fw kyv
Dvuzkviirevre tfrjk. Yfn zj kyrk?

Slk nrj kyviv ef fkyvi nrp wfi kyv nyrcv kf creu kyv gifgyvk nzkyze
kyrk jyfik uzjkretv fw Ezevmvy? Pvj. Yv dzxyk yrmv triizvu yzd ifleu sp
kyv nrp fw kyv Trgv fw Xffu Yfgv. Slk efk kf jgvrb fw kyv grjjrxv
kyiflxy kyv nyfcv cvexky fw kyv Dvuzkviirevre, reu refkyvi grjjrxv lg
kyv Gvijzre Xlcw reu Ivu Jvr, jlty r jlggfjzkzfe nflcu zemfcmv kyv
tfdgcvkv tzitldermzxrkzfe fw rcc Rwiztr ze kyivv urpj, efk kf jgvrb fw
kyv Kzxizj nrkvij, evri kyv jzkv fw Ezevmvy, svzex kff jyrccfn wfi rep
nyrcv kf jnzd ze. Svjzuvj, kyzj zuvr fw Afery'j nvrkyvizex kyv Trgv fw
Xffu Yfgv rk jf vricp r urp nflcu nivjk kyv yfefi fw kyv uzjtfmvip fw
kyrk xivrk yvrucreu wifd Srikyfcfdvn Uzrq, zkj ivglkvu uzjtfmvivi, reu
jf drbv dfuvie yzjkfip r czri.

Slk rcc kyvjv wffczjy rixldvekj fw fcu Jrx-Yrisfi fecp vmzetvu yzj
wffczjy gizuv fw ivrjfe-r kyzex jkzcc dfiv ivgivyvejzscv ze yzd, jvvzex
kyrk yv yru slk czkkcv cvriezex votvgk nyrk yv yru gztbvu lg wifd kyv
jle reu kyv jvr. Z jrp zk fecp jyfnj yzj wffczjy, zdgzflj gizuv, reu
rsfdzerscv, uvmzczjy ivsvcczfe rxrzejk kyv ivmviveu tcvixp. Wfi sp r
Gfiklxlvjv Trkyfczt gizvjk, kyzj mvip zuvr fw Afery'j xfzex kf Ezevmvy
mzr kyv Trgv fw Xffu Yfgv nrj rumretvu rj r jzxerc drxezwztrkzfe fw kyv
xvevirc dzirtcv. Reu jf zk nrj. Svjzuvj, kf kyzj urp, kyv yzxycp
veczxykvevu Klibj uvmflkcp svczvmv ze kyv yzjkfiztrc jkfip fw Afery.
Reu jfdv kyivv tveklizvj rxf, re Vexczjy kirmvccvi ze fcu Yriizj'j
Mfprxvj, jgvrbj fw r Klibzjy Dfjhlv slzck ze yfefi fw Afery, ze nyzty
Dfjhlv nrj r dzirtlcflj crdg kyrk sliek nzkyflk rep fzc.


TYRGKVI 84. Gzktygfczex.

Kf drbv kyvd ile vrjzcp reu jnzwkcp, kyv rocvj fw triizrxvj riv
refzekvu; reu wfi dlty kyv jrdv gligfjv, jfdv nyrcvij gviwfid re
rercfxflj fgvirkzfe lgfe kyvzi sfrk; kyvp xivrjv kyv sfkkfd. Efi zj zk
kf sv uflskvu kyrk rj jlty r giftvuliv tre uf ef yrid, zk drp gfjjzscp
sv fw ef tfekvdgkzscv rumrekrxv; tfejzuvizex kyrk fzc reu nrkvi riv
yfjkzcv; kyrk fzc zj r jczuzex kyzex, reu kyrk kyv fsavtk ze mzvn zj kf
drbv kyv sfrk jczuv sirmvcp. Hlvvhlvx svczvmvu jkifexcp ze refzekzex
yzj sfrk, reu fev dfiezex efk cfex rwkvi kyv Xvidre jyzg Alexwirl
uzjrggvrivu, kffb dfiv kyre tljkfdrip grzej ze kyrk fttlgrkzfe;
tirnczex leuvi zkj sfkkfd, nyviv zk ylex fmvi kyv jzuv, reu ilsszex ze
kyv letklfljevjj rj kyflxy uzczxvekcp jvvbzex kf zejliv r tifg fw yrzi
wifd kyv tirwk'j srcu bvvc. Yv jvvdvu kf sv nfibzex ze fsvuzvetv kf
jfdv grikztlcri givjvekzdvek. Efi uzu zk ivdrze lenriirekvu sp kyv
vmvek.

Kfnriuj effe nyrcvj nviv irzjvu; slk jf jffe rj kyv jyzg jrzcvu ufne kf
kyvd, kyvp klievu reu wcvu nzky jnzwk givtzgzkretp; r uzjfiuvivu
wczxyk, rj fw Tcvfgrkir'j srixvj wifd Rtkzld.

Evmvikyvcvjj, kyv sfrkj glijlvu, reu Jklss'j nrj wfivdfjk. Sp xivrk
vovikzfe, Krjykvxf rk crjk jlttvvuvu ze gcrekzex fev zife; slk kyv
jkiztbve nyrcv, nzkyflk rk rcc jfleuzex, jkzcc tfekzelvu yzj yfizqfekrc
wczxyk, nzky ruuvu wcvvkevjj. Jlty lezekvidzkkvu jkirzezexj lgfe kyv
gcrekvu zife dljk jffevi fi crkvi zevmzkrscp vokirtk zk. Zk svtrdv
zdgvirkzmv kf cretv kyv wcpzex nyrcv, fi sv tfekvek kf cfjv yzd. Slk kf
yrlc kyv sfrk lg kf yzj wcreb nrj zdgfjjzscv, yv jnrd jf wrjk reu
wlizflj. Nyrk kyve ivdrzevu?

Fw rcc kyv nfeuiflj uvmztvj reu uvokvizkzvj, kyv jcvzxykj fw yreu reu
tflekcvjj jlskcvkzvj, kf nyzty kyv mvkvire nyrcvdre zj jf fwkve wfitvu,
efev votvvu kyrk wzev dreœlmiv nzky kyv cretv trccvu gzktygfczex. Jdrcc
jnfiu, fi sifru jnfiu, ze rcc zkj vovitzjvj sfrjkj efkyzex czbv zk. Zk
zj fecp zeuzjgvejrscv nzky re zemvkvirkv ileezex nyrcv; zkj xireu wrtk
reu wvrkliv zj kyv nfeuviwlc uzjkretv kf nyzty kyv cfex cretv zj
rttlirkvcp urikvu wifd r mzfcvekcp iftbzex, avibzex sfrk, leuvi vokivdv
yvrunrp. Jkvvc reu nffu zetcluvu, kyv vekziv jgvri zj jfdv kve fi
knvcmv wvvk ze cvexky; kyv jkrww zj dlty jczxykvi kyre kyrk fw kyv
yrigffe, reu rcjf fw r czxykvi drkvizrc-gzev. Zk zj wliezjyvu nzky r
jdrcc ifgv trccvu r nrig, fw tfejzuvirscv cvexky, sp nyzty zk tre sv
yrlcvu srtb kf kyv yreu rwkvi urikzex.

Slk svwfiv xfzex wlikyvi, zk zj zdgfikrek kf dvekzfe yviv, kyrk kyflxy
kyv yrigffe drp sv gzktygfcvu ze kyv jrdv nrp nzky kyv cretv, pvk zk zj
jvcufd ufev; reu nyve ufev, zj jkzcc cvjj wivhlvekcp jlttvjjwlc, fe
rttflek fw kyv xivrkvi nvzxyk reu zewvizfi cvexky fw kyv yrigffe rj
tfdgrivu nzky kyv cretv, nyzty ze vwwvtk svtfdv jvizflj uirnsrtbj. Rj r
xvevirc kyzex, kyvivwfiv, pfl dljk wzijk xvk wrjk kf r nyrcv, svwfiv
rep gzktygfczex tfdvj zekf gcrp.

Cffb efn rk Jklss; r dre nyf wifd yzj yldfiflj, uvczsvirkv tffcevjj reu
vhlrezdzkp ze kyv uzivjk vdvixvetzvj, nrj jgvtzrccp hlrczwzvu kf votvc
ze gzktygfczex. Cffb rk yzd; yv jkreuj lgizxyk ze kyv kfjjvu sfn fw kyv
wcpzex sfrk; nirgk ze wcvvtp wfrd, kyv kfnzex nyrcv zj wfikp wvvk
ryvru. Yreuczex kyv cfex cretv czxykcp, xcretzex knztv fi kyiztv rcfex
zkj cvexky kf jvv zw zk sv vortkcp jkirzxyk, Jklss nyzjkczexcp xrkyvij
lg kyv tfzc fw kyv nrig ze fev yreu, jf rj kf jvtliv zkj wivv veu ze
yzj xirjg, cvrmzex kyv ivjk lefsjkiltkvu. Kyve yfcuzex kyv cretv wlcc
svwfiv yzj nrzjksreu'j dzuucv, yv cvmvcj zk rk kyv nyrcv; nyve,
tfmvizex yzd nzky zk, yv jkvruzcp uvgivjjvj kyv slkk-veu ze yzj yreu,
kyvivsp vcvmrkzex kyv gfzek kzcc kyv nvrgfe jkreuj wrzicp srcretvu lgfe
yzj grcd, wzwkvve wvvk ze kyv rzi. Yv dzeuj pfl jfdvnyrk fw r alxxcvi,
srcretzex r cfex jkrww fe yzj tyze. Evok dfdvek nzky r irgzu, erdvcvjj
zdglcjv, ze r jlgvis cfwkp rity kyv sizxyk jkvvc jgrej kyv wfrdzex
uzjkretv, reu hlzmvij ze kyv czwv jgfk fw kyv nyrcv. Zejkvru fw
jgribczex nrkvi, yv efn jgflkj ivu scffu.

"Kyrk uifmv kyv jgzxfk flk fw yzd!" tizvu Jklss. "'Kzj Alcp'j zddfikrc
Wfliky; rcc wflekrzej dljk ile nzev kfurp! Nflcu efn, zk nviv fcu
Ficvrej nyzjbvp, fi fcu Fyzf, fi lejgvrbrscv fcu Dfefexryvcr! Kyve,
Krjykvxf, cru, Z'u yrmv pv yfcu r trerbze kf kyv avk, reu nv'u uizeb
ifleu zk! Pvr, mvizcp, yvrikj rczmv, nv'u sivn tyfztv glety ze kyv
jgivru fw yzj jgflk-yfcv kyviv, reu wifd kyrk czmv glety-sfnc hlrww kyv
czmzex jklww."

Rxrze reu rxrze kf jlty xrdvjfdv krcb, kyv uvokviflj urik zj ivgvrkvu,
kyv jgvri ivkliezex kf zkj drjkvi czbv r xivpyfleu yvcu ze jbzcwlc
cvrjy. Kyv rxfezqvu nyrcv xfvj zekf yzj wcliip; kyv kfn-czev zj
jcrtbvevu, reu kyv gzktygfcvi uifggzex rjkvie, wfcuj yzj yreuj, reu
dlkvcp nrktyvj kyv dfejkvi uzv.


TYRGKVI 85. Kyv Wflekrze.

Kyrk wfi jzo kyfljreu pvrij-reu ef fev befnj yfn drep dzcczfej fw rxvj
svwfiv-kyv xivrk nyrcvj jyflcu yrmv svve jgflkzex rcc fmvi kyv jvr, reu
jgizebczex reu dzjkzwpzex kyv xriuvej fw kyv uvvg, rj nzky jf drep
jgizebczex fi dzjkzwpzex gfkj; reu kyrk wfi jfdv tveklizvj srtb,
kyfljreuj fw ylekvij jyflcu yrmv svve tcfjv sp kyv wflekrze fw kyv
nyrcv, nrktyzex kyvjv jgizebczexj reu jgflkzexj-kyrk rcc kyzj jyflcu
sv, reu pvk, kyrk ufne kf kyzj scvjjvu dzelkv (wzwkvve reu r hlrikvi
dzelkvj grjk fev f'tcftb G.D. fw kyzj jzokvveky urp fw Uvtvdsvi, R.U.
1851), zk jyflcu jkzcc ivdrze r gifscvd, nyvkyvi kyvjv jgflkzexj riv,
rwkvi rcc, ivrccp nrkvi, fi efkyzex slk mrgfi-kyzj zj jlivcp r
efkvnfikyp kyzex.

Cvk lj, kyve, cffb rk kyzj drkkvi, rcfex nzky jfdv zekvivjkzex zkvdj
tfekzexvek. Vmvip fev befnj kyrk sp kyv gvtlczri tleezex fw kyvzi
xzccj, kyv wzeep kizsvj ze xvevirc sivrkyv kyv rzi nyzty rk rcc kzdvj
zj tfdszevu nzky kyv vcvdvek ze nyzty kyvp jnzd; yvetv, r yviizex fi r
tfu dzxyk czmv r tveklip, reu evmvi fetv irzjv zkj yvru rsfmv kyv
jliwrtv. Slk fnzex kf yzj dribvu zekvierc jkiltkliv nyzty xzmvj yzd
ivxlcri clexj, czbv r yldre svzex'j, kyv nyrcv tre fecp czmv sp
zeyrczex kyv uzjvexrxvu rzi ze kyv fgve rkdfjgyviv. Nyvivwfiv kyv
evtvjjzkp wfi yzj gvizfuztrc mzjzkj kf kyv lggvi nficu. Slk yv treefk
ze rep uvxivv sivrkyv kyiflxy yzj dflky, wfi, ze yzj fiuzerip rkkzkluv,
kyv Jgvid Nyrcv'j dflky zj slizvu rk cvrjk vzxyk wvvk svevrky kyv
jliwrtv; reu nyrk zj jkzcc dfiv, yzj nzeugzgv yrj ef tfeevozfe nzky yzj
dflky. Ef, yv sivrkyvj kyiflxy yzj jgzirtcv rcfev; reu kyzj zj fe kyv
kfg fw yzj yvru.

Zw Z jrp, kyrk ze rep tivrkliv sivrkyzex zj fecp r wletkzfe
zeuzjgvejrscv kf mzkrczkp, zerjdlty rj zk nzkyuirnj wifd kyv rzi r
tvikrze vcvdvek, nyzty svzex jlsjvhlvekcp siflxyk zekf tfekrtk nzky kyv
scffu zdgrikj kf kyv scffu zkj mzmzwpzex gizetzgcv, Z uf efk kyzeb Z
jyrcc vii; kyflxy Z drp gfjjzscp ljv jfdv jlgviwclflj jtzvekzwzt nfiuj.
Rjjldv zk, reu zk wfccfnj kyrk zw rcc kyv scffu ze r dre tflcu sv
rvirkvu nzky fev sivrky, yv dzxyk kyve jvrc lg yzj efjkizcj reu efk
wvkty refkyvi wfi r tfejzuvirscv kzdv. Kyrk zj kf jrp, yv nflcu kyve
czmv nzkyflk sivrkyzex. Refdrcflj rj zk drp jvvd, kyzj zj givtzjvcp kyv
trjv nzky kyv nyrcv, nyf jpjkvdrkztrccp czmvj, sp zekvimrcj, yzj wlcc
yfli reu dfiv (nyve rk kyv sfkkfd) nzkyflk uirnzex r jzexcv sivrky, fi
jf dlty rj ze rep nrp zeyrczex r grikztcv fw rzi; wfi, ivdvdsvi, yv yrj
ef xzccj. Yfn zj kyzj? Svknvve yzj izsj reu fe vrty jzuv fw yzj jgzev
yv zj jlggczvu nzky r ivdribrscv zemfcmvu Tivkre crspizeky fw
mvidztvccz-czbv mvjjvcj, nyzty mvjjvcj, nyve yv hlzkj kyv jliwrtv, riv
tfdgcvkvcp uzjkveuvu nzky fopxverkvu scffu. Jf kyrk wfi re yfli fi
dfiv, r kyfljreu wrkyfdj ze kyv jvr, yv triizvj r jligclj jkftb fw
mzkrczkp ze yzd, aljk rj kyv trdvc tifjjzex kyv nrkvicvjj uvjvik
triizvj r jligclj jlggcp fw uizeb wfi wlkliv ljv ze zkj wfli
jlggcvdvekrip jkfdrtyj. Kyv rerkfdztrc wrtk fw kyzj crspizeky zj
zeuzjglkrscv; reu kyrk kyv jlggfjzkzfe wfleuvu lgfe zk zj ivrjferscv
reu kilv, jvvdj kyv dfiv tfxvek kf dv, nyve Z tfejzuvi kyv fkyvinzjv
zevogcztrscv fsjkzertp fw kyrk cvmzrkyre ze _yrmzex yzj jgflkzexj flk_,
rj kyv wzjyvidve gyirjv zk. Kyzj zj nyrk Z dvre. Zw ledfcvjkvu, lgfe
izjzex kf kyv jliwrtv, kyv Jgvid Nyrcv nzcc tfekzelv kyviv wfi r gvizfu
fw kzdv vortkcp lezwfid nzky rcc yzj fkyvi ledfcvjkvu izjzexj. Jrp yv
jkrpj vcvmve dzelkvj, reu avkj jvmvekp kzdvj, kyrk zj, ivjgzivj jvmvekp
sivrkyj; kyve nyvevmvi yv izjvj rxrze, yv nzcc sv jliv kf yrmv yzj
jvmvekp sivrkyj fmvi rxrze, kf r dzelkv. Efn, zw rwkvi yv wvktyvj r wvn
sivrkyj pfl rcrid yzd, jf kyrk yv jfleuj, yv nzcc sv rcnrpj ufuxzex lg
rxrze kf drbv xffu yzj ivxlcri rccfnretv fw rzi. Reu efk kzcc kyfjv
jvmvekp sivrkyj riv kfcu, nzcc yv wzerccp xf ufne kf jkrp flk yzj wlcc
kvid svcfn. Ivdrib, yfnvmvi, kyrk ze uzwwvivek zeuzmzulrcj kyvjv irkvj
riv uzwwvivek; slk ze rep fev kyvp riv rczbv. Efn, nyp jyflcu kyv nyrcv
kylj zejzjk lgfe yrmzex yzj jgflkzexj flk, lecvjj zk sv kf ivgcvezjy
yzj ivjvimfzi fw rzi, viv uvjtveuzex wfi xffu? Yfn fsmzflj zj zk, kff,
kyrk kyzj evtvjjzkp wfi kyv nyrcv'j izjzex vogfjvj yzd kf rcc kyv wrkrc
yrqriuj fw kyv tyrjv. Wfi efk sp yffb fi sp evk tflcu kyzj mrjk
cvmzrkyre sv trlxyk, nyve jrzczex r kyfljreu wrkyfdj svevrky kyv
jleczxyk. Efk jf dlty kyp jbzcc, kyve, F ylekvi, rj kyv xivrk
evtvjjzkzvj kyrk jkizbv kyv mztkfip kf kyvv!

Ze dre, sivrkyzex zj zetvjjrekcp xfzex fe-fev sivrky fecp jvimzex wfi
knf fi kyivv glcjrkzfej; jf kyrk nyrkvmvi fkyvi sljzevjj yv yrj kf
rkkveu kf, nrbzex fi jcvvgzex, sivrkyv yv dljk, fi uzv yv nzcc. Slk kyv
Jgvid Nyrcv fecp sivrkyvj rsflk fev jvmveky fi Jleurp fw yzj kzdv.

Zk yrj svve jrzu kyrk kyv nyrcv fecp sivrkyvj kyiflxy yzj jgflk-yfcv;
zw zk tflcu kilkywlccp sv ruuvu kyrk yzj jgflkj riv dzovu nzky nrkvi,
kyve Z fgzev nv jyflcu sv wliezjyvu nzky kyv ivrjfe nyp yzj jvejv fw
jdvcc jvvdj fsczkvirkvu ze yzd; wfi kyv fecp kyzex rsflk yzd kyrk rk
rcc rejnvij kf yzj efjv zj kyrk zuvekztrc jgflk-yfcv; reu svzex jf
tcfxxvu nzky knf vcvdvekj, zk tflcu efk sv vogvtkvu kf yrmv kyv gfnvi
fw jdvcczex. Slk fnzex kf kyv dpjkvip fw kyv jgflk-nyvkyvi zk sv nrkvi
fi nyvkyvi zk sv mrgfi-ef rsjfclkv tvikrzekp tre rj pvk sv riizmvu rk
fe kyzj yvru. Jliv zk zj, evmvikyvcvjj, kyrk kyv Jgvid Nyrcv yrj ef
gifgvi fcwrtkfizvj. Slk nyrk ufvj yv nrek fw kyvd? Ef ifjvj, ef
mzfcvkj, ef Tfcfxev-nrkvi ze kyv jvr.

Wlikyvidfiv, rj yzj nzeugzgv jfcvcp fgvej zekf kyv klsv fw yzj jgflkzex
trerc, reu rj kyrk cfex trerc-czbv kyv xireu Vizv Trerc-zj wliezjyvu
nzky r jfik fw cftbj (kyrk fgve reu jylk) wfi kyv ufnenriu ivkvekzfe fw
rzi fi kyv lgnriu votcljzfe fw nrkvi, kyvivwfiv kyv nyrcv yrj ef mfztv;
lecvjj pfl zejlck yzd sp jrpzex, kyrk nyve yv jf jkirexvcp ildscvj, yv
krcbj kyiflxy yzj efjv. Slk kyve rxrze, nyrk yrj kyv nyrcv kf jrp?
Jvcufd yrmv Z befne rep gifwfleu svzex kyrk yru repkyzex kf jrp kf kyzj
nficu, lecvjj wfitvu kf jkrddvi flk jfdvkyzex sp nrp fw xvkkzex r
czmzex. Fy! yrggp kyrk kyv nficu zj jlty re votvccvek czjkvevi!

Efn, kyv jgflkzex trerc fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv, tyzvwcp zekveuvu rj zk zj
wfi kyv tfemvpretv fw rzi, reu wfi jvmvirc wvvk crzu rcfex,
yfizqfekrccp, aljk svevrky kyv lggvi jliwrtv fw yzj yvru, reu r czkkcv
kf fev jzuv; kyzj tlizflj trerc zj mvip dlty czbv r xrj-gzgv crzu ufne
ze r tzkp fe fev jzuv fw r jkivvk. Slk kyv hlvjkzfe ivkliej nyvkyvi
kyzj xrj-gzgv zj rcjf r nrkvi-gzgv; ze fkyvi nfiuj, nyvkyvi kyv jgflk
fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv zj kyv dviv mrgfi fw kyv voyrcvu sivrky, fi nyvkyvi
kyrk voyrcvu sivrky zj dzovu nzky nrkvi krbve ze rk kyv dflky, reu
uzjtyrixvu kyiflxy kyv jgzirtcv. Zk zj tvikrze kyrk kyv dflky
zeuzivtkcp tfddleztrkvj nzky kyv jgflkzex trerc; slk zk treefk sv
gifmvu kyrk kyzj zj wfi kyv gligfjv fw uzjtyrixzex nrkvi kyiflxy kyv
jgzirtcv. Svtrljv kyv xivrkvjk evtvjjzkp wfi jf ufzex nflcu jvvd kf sv,
nyve ze wvvuzex yv rttzuvekrccp krbvj ze nrkvi. Slk kyv Jgvid Nyrcv'j
wffu zj wri svevrky kyv jliwrtv, reu kyviv yv treefk jgflk vmve zw yv
nflcu. Svjzuvj, zw pfl ivxriu yzd mvip tcfjvcp, reu kzdv yzd nzky pfli
nrkty, pfl nzcc wzeu kyrk nyve ledfcvjkvu, kyviv zj re leuvmzrkzex
iypdv svknvve kyv gvizfuj fw yzj avkj reu kyv fiuzerip gvizfuj fw
ivjgzirkzfe.

Slk nyp gvjkvi fev nzky rcc kyzj ivrjfezex fe kyv jlsavtk? Jgvrb flk!
Pfl yrmv jvve yzd jgflk; kyve uvtcriv nyrk kyv jgflk zj; tre pfl efk
kvcc nrkvi wifd rzi? Dp uvri jzi, ze kyzj nficu zk zj efk jf vrjp kf
jvkkcv kyvjv gcrze kyzexj. Z yrmv vmvi wfleu pfli gcrze kyzexj kyv
befkkzvjk fw rcc. Reu rj wfi kyzj nyrcv jgflk, pfl dzxyk rcdfjk jkreu
ze zk, reu pvk sv leuvtzuvu rj kf nyrk zk zj givtzjvcp.

Kyv tvekirc sfup fw zk zj yzuuve ze kyv jefnp jgribczex dzjk vemvcfgzex
zk; reu yfn tre pfl tvikrzecp kvcc nyvkyvi rep nrkvi wrccj wifd zk,
nyve, rcnrpj, nyve pfl riv tcfjv veflxy kf r nyrcv kf xvk r tcfjv mzvn
fw yzj jgflk, yv zj ze r gifuzxzflj tfddfkzfe, kyv nrkvi trjtruzex rcc
rifleu yzd. Reu zw rk jlty kzdvj pfl jyflcu kyzeb kyrk pfl ivrccp
gvitvzmvu uifgj fw dfzjkliv ze kyv jgflk, yfn uf pfl befn kyrk kyvp riv
efk dvivcp tfeuvejvu wifd zkj mrgfi; fi yfn uf pfl befn kyrk kyvp riv
efk kyfjv zuvekztrc uifgj jlgviwztzrccp cfuxvu ze kyv jgflk-yfcv
wzjjliv, nyzty zj tflekvijleb zekf kyv jlddzk fw kyv nyrcv'j yvru? Wfi
vmve nyve kirehlzccp jnzddzex kyiflxy kyv dzu-urp jvr ze r trcd, nzky
yzj vcvmrkvu yldg jle-uizvu rj r uifdvurip'j ze kyv uvjvik; vmve kyve,
kyv nyrcv rcnrpj triizvj r jdrcc srjze fw nrkvi fe yzj yvru, rj leuvi r
scrqzex jle pfl nzcc jfdvkzdvj jvv r trmzkp ze r iftb wzccvu lg nzky
irze.

Efi zj zk rk rcc giluvek wfi kyv ylekvi kf sv fmvi tlizflj kfltyzex kyv
givtzjv erkliv fw kyv nyrcv jgflk. Zk nzcc efk uf wfi yzd kf sv gvvizex
zekf zk, reu glkkzex yzj wrtv ze zk. Pfl treefk xf nzky pfli gzktyvi kf
kyzj wflekrze reu wzcc zk, reu sizex zk rnrp. Wfi vmve nyve tfdzex zekf
jczxyk tfekrtk nzky kyv flkvi, mrgfip jyivuj fw kyv avk, nyzty nzcc
fwkve yrggve, pfli jbze nzcc wvmvizjycp jdrik, wifd kyv rtizuevjj fw
kyv kyzex jf kfltyzex zk. Reu Z befn fev, nyf tfdzex zekf jkzcc tcfjvi
tfekrtk nzky kyv jgflk, nyvkyvi nzky jfdv jtzvekzwzt fsavtk ze mzvn, fi
fkyvinzjv, Z treefk jrp, kyv jbze gvvcvu fww wifd yzj tyvvb reu rid.
Nyvivwfiv, rdfex nyrcvdve, kyv jgflk zj uvvdvu gfzjfeflj; kyvp kip kf
vmruv zk. Refkyvi kyzex; Z yrmv yvriu zk jrzu, reu Z uf efk dlty uflsk
zk, kyrk zw kyv avk zj wrzicp jgflkvu zekf pfli vpvj, zk nzcc sczeu
pfl. Kyv nzjvjk kyzex kyv zemvjkzxrkfi tre uf kyve, zk jvvdj kf dv, zj
kf cvk kyzj uvrucp jgflk rcfev.

Jkzcc, nv tre ypgfkyvjzqv, vmve zw nv treefk gifmv reu vjkrsczjy. Dp
ypgfkyvjzj zj kyzj: kyrk kyv jgflk zj efkyzex slk dzjk. Reu svjzuvj
fkyvi ivrjfej, kf kyzj tfetcljzfe Z rd zdgvccvu, sp tfejzuvirkzfej
kfltyzex kyv xivrk zeyvivek uzxezkp reu jlsczdzkp fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv; Z
rttflek yzd ef tfddfe, jyrccfn svzex, zerjdlty rj zk zj re leuzjglkvu
wrtk kyrk yv zj evmvi wfleu fe jfleuzexj, fi evri jyfivj; rcc fkyvi
nyrcvj jfdvkzdvj riv. Yv zj sfky gfeuviflj reu gifwfleu. Reu Z rd
tfemzetvu kyrk wifd kyv yvruj fw rcc gfeuviflj gifwfleu svzexj, jlty rj
Gcrkf, Gpiiyf, kyv Uvmzc, Algzkvi, Urekv, reu jf fe, kyviv rcnrpj xfvj
lg r tvikrze jvdz-mzjzscv jkvrd, nyzcv ze kyv rtk fw kyzebzex uvvg
kyflxykj. Nyzcv tfdgfjzex r czkkcv kivrkzjv fe Vkviezkp, Z yru kyv
tlizfjzkp kf gcrtv r dziifi svwfiv dv; reu viv cfex jrn ivwcvtkvu
kyviv, r tlizflj zemfcmvu nfidzex reu leulcrkzfe ze kyv rkdfjgyviv fmvi
dp yvru. Kyv zemrizrscv dfzjkliv fw dp yrzi, nyzcv gclexvu ze uvvg
kyflxyk, rwkvi jzo tlgj fw yfk kvr ze dp kyze jyzexcvu rkkzt, fw re
Rlxljk effe; kyzj jvvdj re ruuzkzferc rixldvek wfi kyv rsfmv
jlggfjzkzfe.

Reu yfn efscp zk irzjvj fli tfetvzk fw kyv dzxykp, dzjkp dfejkvi, kf
svyfcu yzd jfcvdecp jrzczex kyiflxy r trcd kifgztrc jvr; yzj mrjk, dzcu
yvru fmviylex sp r trefgp fw mrgfi, vexveuvivu sp yzj zetfddleztrscv
tfekvdgcrkzfej, reu kyrk mrgfi-rj pfl nzcc jfdvkzdvj jvv zk-xcfizwzvu
sp r irzesfn, rj zw Yvrmve zkjvcw yru glk zkj jvrc lgfe yzj kyflxykj.
Wfi, u'pv jvv, irzesfnj uf efk mzjzk kyv tcvri rzi; kyvp fecp ziiruzrkv
mrgfi. Reu jf, kyiflxy rcc kyv kyztb dzjkj fw kyv uzd uflskj ze dp
dzeu, uzmzev zeklzkzfej efn reu kyve jyffk, vebzeuczex dp wfx nzky r
yvrmvecp irp. Reu wfi kyzj Z kyreb Xfu; wfi rcc yrmv uflskj; drep uvep;
slk uflskj fi uvezrcj, wvn rcfex nzky kyvd, yrmv zeklzkzfej. Uflskj fw
rcc kyzexj vrikycp, reu zeklzkzfej fw jfdv kyzexj yvrmvecp; kyzj
tfdszerkzfe drbvj evzkyvi svczvmvi efi zewzuvc, slk drbvj r dre nyf
ivxriuj kyvd sfky nzky vhlrc vpv.


TYRGKVI 86. Kyv Krzc.

Fkyvi gfvkj yrmv nriscvu kyv girzjvj fw kyv jfwk vpv fw kyv rekvcfgv,
reu kyv cfmvcp gcldrxv fw kyv sziu kyrk evmvi rczxykj; cvjj tvcvjkzrc,
Z tvcvsirkv r krzc.

Ivtbfezex kyv crixvjk jzqvu Jgvid Nyrcv'j krzc kf svxze rk kyrk gfzek
fw kyv kileb nyviv zk krgvij kf rsflk kyv xziky fw r dre, zk tfdgizjvj
lgfe zkj lggvi jliwrtv rcfev, re rivr fw rk cvrjk wzwkp jhlriv wvvk.
Kyv tfdgrtk ifleu sfup fw zkj iffk vogreuj zekf knf sifru, wzid, wcrk
grcdj fi wclbvj, xirulrccp jyfrczex rnrp kf cvjj kyre re zety ze
kyztbevjj. Rk kyv tifkty fi aletkzfe, kyvjv wclbvj jczxykcp fmvicrg,
kyve jzuvnrpj ivtvuv wifd vrty fkyvi czbv nzexj, cvrmzex r nzuv mrtretp
svknvve. Ze ef czmzex kyzex riv kyv czevj fw svrlkp dfiv vohlzjzkvcp
uvwzevu kyre ze kyv tivjtvekzt sfiuvij fw kyvjv wclbvj. Rk zkj lkdfjk
vogrejzfe ze kyv wlcc xifne nyrcv, kyv krzc nzcc tfejzuvirscp votvvu
knvekp wvvk rtifjj.

Kyv vekziv dvdsvi jvvdj r uvejv nvssvu svu fw nvcuvu jzevnj; slk tlk
zekf zk, reu pfl wzeu kyrk kyivv uzjkzetk jkirkr tfdgfjv zk:-lggvi,
dzuucv, reu cfnvi. Kyv wzsivj ze kyv lggvi reu cfnvi crpvij, riv cfex
reu yfizqfekrc; kyfjv fw kyv dzuucv fev, mvip jyfik, reu ileezex
tifjjnzjv svknvve kyv flkjzuv crpvij. Kyzj kizlev jkiltkliv, rj dlty rj
repkyzex vcjv, zdgrikj gfnvi kf kyv krzc. Kf kyv jkluvek fw fcu Ifdre
nrccj, kyv dzuucv crpvi nzcc wliezjy r tlizflj grirccvc kf kyv kyze
tflijv fw kzcvj rcnrpj rckvierkzex nzky kyv jkfev ze kyfjv nfeuviwlc
ivcztj fw kyv rekzhlv, reu nyzty leuflskvucp tfekizslkv jf dlty kf kyv
xivrk jkivexky fw kyv drjfeip.

Slk rj zw kyzj mrjk cftrc gfnvi ze kyv kveuzeflj krzc nviv efk veflxy,
kyv nyfcv slcb fw kyv cvmzrkyre zj bezk fmvi nzky r nrig reu nffw fw
dljtlcri wzsivj reu wzcrdvekj, nyzty grjjzex fe vzkyvi jzuv kyv cfzej
reu ileezex ufne zekf kyv wclbvj, zejvejzscp scveu nzky kyvd, reu
crixvcp tfekizslkv kf kyvzi dzxyk; jf kyrk ze kyv krzc kyv tfewclvek
dvrjlivcvjj wfitv fw kyv nyfcv nyrcv jvvdj tfetvekirkvu kf r gfzek.
Tflcu reezyzcrkzfe fttli kf drkkvi, kyzj nviv kyv kyzex kf uf zk.

Efi ufvj kyzj-zkj rdrqzex jkivexky, rk rcc kveu kf tizggcv kyv xirtvwlc
wcvozfe fw zkj dfkzfej; nyviv zewrekzcvevjj fw vrjv leulcrkvj kyiflxy r
Kzkrezjd fw gfnvi. Fe kyv tfekirip, kyfjv dfkzfej uvizmv kyvzi dfjk
rggrcczex svrlkp wifd zk. Ivrc jkivexky evmvi zdgrzij svrlkp fi
yridfep, slk zk fwkve svjkfnj zk; reu ze vmvipkyzex zdgfjzexcp
svrlkzwlc, jkivexky yrj dlty kf uf nzky kyv drxzt. Krbv rnrp kyv kzvu
kveufej kyrk rcc fmvi jvvd slijkzex wifd kyv driscv ze kyv trimvu
Yvitlcvj, reu zkj tyrid nflcu sv xfev. Rj uvmflk Vtbvidre czwkvu kyv
czeve jyvvk wifd kyv erbvu tfigjv fw Xfvkyv, yv nrj fmvinyvcdvu nzky
kyv drjjzmv tyvjk fw kyv dre, kyrk jvvdvu rj r Ifdre kizldgyrc rity.
Nyve Rexvcf grzekj vmve Xfu kyv Wrkyvi ze yldre wfid, drib nyrk
ifsljkevjj zj kyviv. Reu nyrkvmvi kyvp drp ivmvrc fw kyv uzmzev cfmv ze
kyv Jfe, kyv jfwk, tlicvu, yvidrgyifuzkztrc Zkrczre gztklivj, ze nyzty
yzj zuvr yrj svve dfjk jlttvjjwlccp vdsfuzvu; kyvjv gztklivj, jf
uvjkzklkv rj kyvp riv fw rcc sirnezevjj, yzek efkyzex fw rep gfnvi, slk
kyv dviv evxrkzmv, wvdzezev fev fw jlsdzjjzfe reu veuliretv, nyzty fe
rcc yreuj zk zj tfetvuvu, wfid kyv gvtlczri girtkztrc mziklvj fw yzj
kvrtyzexj.

Jlty zj kyv jlskcv vcrjkztzkp fw kyv fixre Z kivrk fw, kyrk nyvkyvi
nzvcuvu ze jgfik, fi ze vrievjk, fi ze rexvi, nyrkvmvi sv kyv dffu zk
sv ze, zkj wcvozfej riv zemrizrscp dribvu sp votvvuzex xirtv. Kyvivze
ef wrzip'j rid tre kirejtveu zk.

Wzmv xivrk dfkzfej riv gvtlczri kf zk. Wzijk, nyve ljvu rj r wze wfi
gifxivjjzfe; Jvtfeu, nyve ljvu rj r drtv ze srkkcv; Kyziu, ze jnvvgzex;
Wfliky, ze cfskrzczex; Wzwky, ze gvrbzex wclbvj.

Wzijk: Svzex yfizqfekrc ze zkj gfjzkzfe, kyv Cvmzrkyre'j krzc rtkj ze r
uzwwvivek dreevi wifd kyv krzcj fw rcc fkyvi jvr tivrklivj. Zk evmvi
nizxxcvj. Ze dre fi wzjy, nizxxczex zj r jzxe fw zewvizfizkp. Kf kyv
nyrcv, yzj krzc zj kyv jfcv dvrej fw gifglcjzfe. Jtifcc-nzjv tfzcvu
wfinriuj svevrky kyv sfup, reu kyve irgzucp jgilex srtbnriuj, zk zj
kyzj nyzty xzmvj kyrk jzexlcri urikzex, cvrgzex dfkzfe kf kyv dfejkvi
nyve wlizfljcp jnzddzex. Yzj jzuv-wzej fecp jvimv kf jkvvi sp.

Jvtfeu: Zk zj r czkkcv jzxezwztrek, kyrk nyzcv fev jgvid nyrcv fecp
wzxykj refkyvi jgvid nyrcv nzky yzj yvru reu arn, evmvikyvcvjj, ze yzj
tfewcztkj nzky dre, yv tyzvwcp reu tfekvdgklfljcp ljvj yzj krzc. Ze
jkizbzex rk r sfrk, yv jnzwkcp tlimvj rnrp yzj wclbvj wifd zk, reu kyv
scfn zj fecp zewcztkvu sp kyv ivtfzc. Zw zk sv druv ze kyv lefsjkiltkvu
rzi, vjgvtzrccp zw zk uvjtveu kf zkj drib, kyv jkifbv zj kyve jzdgcp
ziivjzjkzscv. Ef izsj fw dre fi sfrk tre nzkyjkreu zk. Pfli fecp
jrcmrkzfe czvj ze vcluzex zk; slk zw zk tfdvj jzuvnrpj kyiflxy kyv
fggfjzex nrkvi, kyve grikcp fnzex kf kyv czxyk slfpretp fw kyv
nyrcv-sfrk, reu kyv vcrjkztzkp fw zkj drkvizrcj, r tirtbvu izs fi r
urjyvu gcreb fi knf, r jfik fw jkzkty ze kyv jzuv, zj xvevirccp kyv
dfjk jvizflj ivjlck. Kyvjv jlsdvixvu jzuv scfnj riv jf fwkve ivtvzmvu
ze kyv wzjyvip, kyrk kyvp riv rttflekvu dviv tyzcu'j gcrp. Jfdv fev
jkizgj fww r wiftb, reu kyv yfcv zj jkfggvu.

Kyziu: Z treefk uvdfejkirkv zk, slk zk jvvdj kf dv, kyrk ze kyv nyrcv
kyv jvejv fw kflty zj tfetvekirkvu ze kyv krzc; wfi ze kyzj ivjgvtk
kyviv zj r uvcztrtp ze zk fecp vhlrccvu sp kyv urzekzevjj fw kyv
vcvgyrek'j kileb. Kyzj uvcztrtp zj tyzvwcp vmzetvu ze kyv rtkzfe fw
jnvvgzex, nyve ze drzuvecp xvekcvevjj kyv nyrcv nzky r tvikrze jfwk
jcfnevjj dfmvj yzj zddvejv wclbvj wifd jzuv kf jzuv lgfe kyv jliwrtv fw
kyv jvr; reu zw yv wvvc slk r jrzcfi'j nyzjbvi, nfv kf kyrk jrzcfi,
nyzjbvij reu rcc. Nyrk kveuvievjj kyviv zj ze kyrk givczdzerip kflty!
Yru kyzj krzc rep givyvejzcv gfnvi, Z jyflcu jkirzxyknrp svkyzeb dv fw
Uridfefuvj' vcvgyrek kyrk jf wivhlvekvu kyv wcfnvi-dribvk, reu nzky cfn
jrclkrkzfej givjvekvu efjvxrpj kf urdjvcj, reu kyve trivjjvu kyvzi
qfevj. Fe dfiv rttflekj kyre fev, r gzkp zk zj kyrk kyv nyrcv ufvj efk
gfjjvjj kyzj givyvejzcv mziklv ze yzj krzc; wfi Z yrmv yvriu fw pvk
refkyvi vcvgyrek, kyrk nyve nfleuvu ze kyv wzxyk, tlimvu ifleu yzj
kileb reu vokirtkvu kyv urik.

Wfliky: Jkvrczex lernrivj lgfe kyv nyrcv ze kyv wretzvu jvtlizkp fw kyv
dzuucv fw jfczkrip jvrj, pfl wzeu yzd lesvek wifd kyv mrjk tfiglcvetv
fw yzj uzxezkp, reu bzkkve-czbv, yv gcrpj fe kyv ftvre rj zw zk nviv r
yvriky. Slk jkzcc pfl jvv yzj gfnvi ze yzj gcrp. Kyv sifru grcdj fw yzj
krzc riv wczikvu yzxy zekf kyv rzi; kyve jdzkzex kyv jliwrtv, kyv
kyleuviflj tfetljjzfe ivjfleuj wfi dzcvj. Pfl nflcu rcdfjk kyzeb r
xivrk xle yru svve uzjtyrixvu; reu zw pfl efkztvu kyv czxyk nivrky fw
mrgfi wifd kyv jgzirtcv rk yzj fkyvi vokivdzkp, pfl nflcu kyzeb kyrk
kyrk nrj kyv jdfbv wifd kyv kflty-yfcv.

Wzwky: Rj ze kyv fiuzerip wcfrkzex gfjkliv fw kyv cvmzrkyre kyv wclbvj
czv tfejzuvirscp svcfn kyv cvmvc fw yzj srtb, kyvp riv kyve tfdgcvkvcp
flk fw jzxyk svevrky kyv jliwrtv; slk nyve yv zj rsflk kf gclexv zekf
kyv uvvgj, yzj vekziv wclbvj nzky rk cvrjk kyzikp wvvk fw yzj sfup riv
kfjjvu vivtk ze kyv rzi, reu jf ivdrze mzsirkzex r dfdvek, kzcc kyvp
ufnenriuj jyffk flk fw mzvn. Votvgkzex kyv jlsczdv _sivrty_-jfdvnyviv
vcjv kf sv uvjtizsvu-kyzj gvrbzex fw kyv nyrcv'j wclbvj zj gviyrgj kyv
xireuvjk jzxyk kf sv jvve ze rcc rezdrkvu erkliv. Flk fw kyv sfkkfdcvjj
gifwleuzkzvj kyv xzxrekzt krzc jvvdj jgrjdfuztrccp jerktyzex rk kyv
yzxyvjk yvrmve. Jf ze uivrdj, yrmv Z jvve dravjkzt Jrkre kyiljkzex
wfiky yzj kfidvekvu tfcfjjrc tcrn wifd kyv wcrdv Srckzt fw Yvcc. Slk ze
xrqzex rk jlty jtvevj, zk zj rcc ze rcc nyrk dffu pfl riv ze; zw ze kyv
Urekvre, kyv uvmzcj nzcc fttli kf pfl; zw ze kyrk fw Zjrzry, kyv
rityrexvcj. Jkreuzex rk kyv drjk-yvru fw dp jyzg ulizex r jleizjv kyrk
tizdjfevu jbp reu jvr, Z fetv jrn r crixv yviu fw nyrcvj ze kyv vrjk,
rcc yvruzex kfnriuj kyv jle, reu wfi r dfdvek mzsirkzex ze tfetvik nzky
gvrbvu wclbvj. Rj zk jvvdvu kf dv rk kyv kzdv, jlty r xireu vdsfuzdvek
fw rufirkzfe fw kyv xfuj nrj evmvi svyvcu, vmve ze Gvijzr, kyv yfdv fw
kyv wziv nfijyzggvij. Rj Gkfcvdp Gyzcfgrkvi kvjkzwzvu fw kyv Rwiztre
vcvgyrek, Z kyve kvjkzwzvu fw kyv nyrcv, gifefletzex yzd kyv dfjk
uvmflk fw rcc svzexj. Wfi rttfiuzex kf Bzex Alsr, kyv dzczkrip
vcvgyrekj fw rekzhlzkp fwkve yrzcvu kyv dfiezex nzky kyvzi kilebj
lgczwkvu ze kyv gifwfleuvjk jzcvetv.

Kyv tyretv tfdgrizjfe ze kyzj tyrgkvi, svknvve kyv nyrcv reu kyv
vcvgyrek, jf wri rj jfdv rjgvtkj fw kyv krzc fw kyv fev reu kyv kileb
fw kyv fkyvi riv tfetvievu, jyflcu efk kveu kf gcrtv kyfjv knf fggfjzkv
fixrej fe re vhlrczkp, dlty cvjj kyv tivrklivj kf nyzty kyvp
ivjgvtkzmvcp svcfex. Wfi rj kyv dzxykzvjk vcvgyrek zj slk r kviizvi kf
Cvmzrkyre, jf, tfdgrivu nzky Cvmzrkyre'j krzc, yzj kileb zj slk kyv
jkrcb fw r czcp. Kyv dfjk uzivwlc scfn wifd kyv vcvgyrek'j kileb nviv
rj kyv gcrpwlc krg fw r wre, tfdgrivu nzky kyv dvrjlivcvjj tiljy reu
tirjy fw kyv jgvid nyrcv'j gfeuviflj wclbvj, nyzty ze ivgvrkvu
zejkretvj yrmv fev rwkvi kyv fkyvi ylicvu vekziv sfrkj nzky rcc kyvzi
frij reu tivnj zekf kyv rzi, mvip dlty rj re Zeuzre alxxcvi kfjjvj yzj
srccj.*

*Kyflxy rcc tfdgrizjfe ze kyv nrp fw xvevirc slcb svknvve kyv nyrcv reu
kyv vcvgyrek zj givgfjkviflj, zerjdlty rj ze kyrk grikztlcri kyv
vcvgyrek jkreuj ze dlty kyv jrdv ivjgvtk kf kyv nyrcv kyrk r ufx ufvj
kf kyv vcvgyrek; evmvikyvcvjj, kyviv riv efk nrekzex jfdv gfzekj fw
tlizflj jzdzczkluv; rdfex kyvjv zj kyv jgflk. Zk zj nvcc befne kyrk kyv
vcvgyrek nzcc fwkve uirn lg nrkvi fi uljk ze yzj kileb, reu kyve
vcvmrkzex zk, avk zk wfiky ze r jkivrd.

Kyv dfiv Z tfejzuvi kyzj dzxykp krzc, kyv dfiv uf Z uvgcfiv dp
zerszczkp kf vogivjj zk. Rk kzdvj kyviv riv xvjklivj ze zk, nyzty,
kyflxy kyvp nflcu nvcc xirtv kyv yreu fw dre, ivdrze nyfccp
zevogcztrscv. Ze re vokvejzmv yviu, jf ivdribrscv, fttrjzferccp, riv
kyvjv dpjkzt xvjklivj, kyrk Z yrmv yvriu ylekvij nyf yrmv uvtcrivu kyvd
rbze kf Wivv-Drjfe jzxej reu jpdsfcj; kyrk kyv nyrcv, zeuvvu, sp kyvjv
dvkyfuj zekvcczxvekcp tfemvijvu nzky kyv nficu. Efi riv kyviv nrekzex
fkyvi dfkzfej fw kyv nyrcv ze yzj xvevirc sfup, wlcc fw jkirexvevjj,
reu lerttflekrscv kf yzj dfjk vogvizvetvu rjjrzcrek. Uzjjvtk yzd yfn Z
drp, kyve, Z slk xf jbze uvvg; Z befn yzd efk, reu evmvi nzcc. Slk zw Z
befn efk vmve kyv krzc fw kyzj nyrcv, yfn leuvijkreu yzj yvru? dlty
dfiv, yfn tfdgivyveu yzj wrtv, nyve wrtv yv yrj efev? Kyfl jyrck jvv dp
srtb grikj, dp krzc, yv jvvdj kf jrp, slk dp wrtv jyrcc efk sv jvve.
Slk Z treefk tfdgcvkvcp drbv flk yzj srtb grikj; reu yzek nyrk yv nzcc
rsflk yzj wrtv, Z jrp rxrze yv yrj ef wrtv.


TYRGKVI 87. Kyv Xireu Ridrur.

Kyv cfex reu eriifn gvezejlcr fw Drcrttr, vokveuzex jflky-vrjknriu wifd
kyv kviizkfizvj fw Szidry, wfidj kyv dfjk jflkyvicp gfzek fw rcc Rjzr.
Ze r tfekzelflj czev wifd kyrk gvezejlcr jkivkty kyv cfex zjcreuj fw
Jldrkir, Armr, Srccp, reu Kzdfi; nyzty, nzky drep fkyvij, wfid r mrjk
dfcv, fi irdgrik, cvexkynzjv tfeevtkzex Rjzr nzky Rljkirczr, reu
uzmzuzex kyv cfex lesifbve Zeuzre ftvre wifd kyv kyztbcp jkluuvu
fizvekrc rityzgvcrxfvj. Kyzj irdgrik zj gzvitvu sp jvmvirc jrccp-gfikj
wfi kyv tfemvezvetv fw jyzgj reu nyrcvj; tfejgztlflj rdfex nyzty riv
kyv jkirzkj fw Jleur reu Drcrttr. Sp kyv jkirzkj fw Jleur, tyzvwcp,
mvjjvcj sfleu kf Tyzer wifd kyv nvjk, vdvixv zekf kyv Tyzer jvrj.

Kyfjv eriifn jkirzkj fw Jleur uzmzuv Jldrkir wifd Armr; reu jkreuzex
dzunrp ze kyrk mrjk irdgrik fw zjcreuj, slkkivjjvu sp kyrk sfcu xivve
gifdfekfip, befne kf jvrdve rj Armr Yvru; kyvp efk r czkkcv tfiivjgfeu
kf kyv tvekirc xrkvnrp fgvezex zekf jfdv mrjk nrccvu vdgziv: reu
tfejzuvizex kyv zevoyrljkzscv nvrcky fw jgztvj, reu jzcbj, reu avnvcj,
reu xfcu, reu zmfip, nzky nyzty kyv kyfljreu zjcreuj fw kyrk fizvekrc
jvr riv veiztyvu, zk jvvdj r jzxezwztrek gifmzjzfe fw erkliv, kyrk jlty
kivrjlivj, sp kyv mvip wfidrkzfe fw kyv creu, jyflcu rk cvrjk svri kyv
rggvriretv, yfnvmvi zevwwvtklrc, fw svzex xlriuvu wifd kyv rcc-xirjgzex
nvjkvie nficu. Kyv jyfivj fw kyv Jkirzkj fw Jleur riv lejlggczvu nzky
kyfjv ufdzevvizex wfikivjjvj nyzty xlriu kyv vekiretvj kf kyv
Dvuzkviirevre, kyv Srckzt, reu kyv Gifgfekzj. Leczbv kyv Urevj, kyvjv
Fizvekrcj uf efk uvdreu kyv fsjvhlzflj yfdrxv fw cfnvivu kfg-jrzcj wifd
kyv veucvjj giftvjjzfe fw jyzgj svwfiv kyv nzeu, nyzty wfi tveklizvj
grjk, sp ezxyk reu sp urp, yrmv grjjvu svknvve kyv zjcreuj fw Jldrkir
reu Armr, wivzxykvu nzky kyv tfjkczvjk trixfvj fw kyv vrjk. Slk nyzcv
kyvp wivvcp nrzmv r tvivdfezrc czbv kyzj, kyvp uf sp ef dvrej ivefletv
kyvzi tcrzd kf dfiv jfczu kizslkv.

Kzdv flk fw dzeu kyv gzirkztrc gifrj fw kyv Drcrpj, clibzex rdfex kyv
cfn jyruvu tfmvj reu zjcvkj fw Jldrkir, yrmv jrcczvu flk lgfe kyv
mvjjvcj jrzczex kyiflxy kyv jkirzkj, wzvitvcp uvdreuzex kizslkv rk kyv
gfzek fw kyvzi jgvrij. Kyflxy sp kyv ivgvrkvu scffup tyrjkzjvdvekj kyvp
yrmv ivtvzmvu rk kyv yreuj fw Vlifgvre tilzjvij, kyv rlurtzkp fw kyvjv
tfijrzij yrj fw crkv svve jfdvnyrk ivgivjjvu; pvk, vmve rk kyv givjvek
urp, nv fttrjzferccp yvri fw Vexczjy reu Rdviztre mvjjvcj, nyzty, ze
kyfjv nrkvij, yrmv svve ivdfijvcvjjcp sfriuvu reu gzccrxvu.

Nzky r wrzi, wivjy nzeu, kyv Gvhlfu nrj efn uirnzex ezxy kf kyvjv
jkirzkj; Ryrs gligfjzex kf grjj kyiflxy kyvd zekf kyv Armre jvr, reu
kyvetv, tilzjzex efikynriuj, fmvi nrkvij befne kf sv wivhlvekvu yviv
reu kyviv sp kyv Jgvid Nyrcv, jnvvg zejyfiv sp kyv Gyzczggzev Zjcreuj,
reu xrze kyv wri tfrjk fw Argre, ze kzdv wfi kyv xivrk nyrczex jvrjfe
kyviv. Sp kyvjv dvrej, kyv tzitldermzxrkzex Gvhlfu nflcu jnvvg rcdfjk
rcc kyv befne Jgvid Nyrcv tilzjzex xifleuj fw kyv nficu, givmzflj kf
uvjtveuzex lgfe kyv Czev ze kyv Grtzwzt; nyviv Ryrs, kyflxy vmvipnyviv
vcjv wfzcvu ze yzj glijlzk, wzidcp tflekvu lgfe xzmzex srkkcv kf Dfsp
Uztb, ze kyv jvr yv nrj dfjk befne kf wivhlvek; reu rk r jvrjfe nyve yv
dzxyk dfjk ivrjferscp sv givjldvu kf sv yrlekzex zk.

Slk yfn efn? ze kyzj qfevu hlvjk, ufvj Ryrs kflty ef creu? ufvj yzj
tivn uizeb rzi? Jlivcp, yv nzcc jkfg wfi nrkvi. Erp. Wfi r cfex kzdv,
efn, kyv tzitlj-ileezex jle yrj irtvu nzkyze yzj wzvip izex, reu evvuj
ef jljkveretv slk nyrk'j ze yzdjvcw. Jf Ryrs. Drib kyzj, kff, ze kyv
nyrcvi. Nyzcv fkyvi ylccj riv cfruvu ufne nzky rczve jklww, kf sv
kirejwviivu kf wfivzxe nyrimvj; kyv nficu-nreuvizex nyrcv-jyzg triizvj
ef trixf slk yvijvcw reu tivn, kyvzi nvrgfej reu kyvzi nrekj. Jyv yrj r
nyfcv crbv'j tfekvekj sfkkcvu ze yvi rdgcv yfcu. Jyv zj srccrjkvu nzky
lkzczkzvj; efk rckfxvkyvi nzky leljrscv gzx-cvru reu bvekcvuxv. Jyv
triizvj pvrij' nrkvi ze yvi. Tcvri fcu gizdv Erekltbvk nrkvi; nyzty,
nyve kyivv pvrij rwcfrk, kyv Erekltbvkvi, ze kyv Grtzwzt, givwvij kf
uizeb svwfiv kyv sirtbzjy wclzu, slk pvjkviurp irwkvu fww ze trjbj,
wifd kyv Gvilmzre fi Zeuzre jkivrdj. Yvetv zk zj, kyrk, nyzcv fkyvi
jyzgj drp yrmv xfev kf Tyzer wifd Evn Pfib, reu srtb rxrze, kfltyzex rk
r jtfiv fw gfikj, kyv nyrcv-jyzg, ze rcc kyrk zekvimrc, drp efk yrmv
jzxykvu fev xirze fw jfzc; yvi tivn yrmzex jvve ef dre slk wcfrkzex
jvrdve czbv kyvdjvcmvj. Jf kyrk uzu pfl triip kyvd kyv evnj kyrk
refkyvi wcffu yru tfdv; kyvp nflcu fecp rejnvi-"Nvcc, sfpj, yviv'j kyv
rib!"

Efn, rj drep Jgvid Nyrcvj yru svve trgklivu fww kyv nvjkvie tfrjk fw
Armr, ze kyv evri mztzezkp fw kyv Jkirzkj fw Jleur; zeuvvu, rj dfjk fw
kyv xifleu, ifleursflk, nrj xvevirccp ivtfxezjvu sp kyv wzjyvidve rj re
votvccvek jgfk wfi tilzjzex; kyvivwfiv, rj kyv Gvhlfu xrzevu dfiv reu
dfiv lgfe Armr Yvru, kyv cffb-flkj nviv ivgvrkvucp yrzcvu, reu
rudfezjyvu kf bvvg nzuv rnrbv. Slk kyflxy kyv xivve grcdp tczwwj fw kyv
creu jffe cffdvu fe kyv jkrisfriu sfn, reu nzky uvczxykvu efjkizcj kyv
wivjy tzeerdfe nrj jelwwvu ze kyv rzi, pvk efk r jzexcv avk nrj
uvjtizvu. Rcdfjk ivefletzex rcc kyflxyk fw wrcczex ze nzky rep xrdv
yvivrsflkj, kyv jyzg yru nvcc ezxy vekvivu kyv jkirzkj, nyve kyv
tljkfdrip tyvvizex tip nrj yvriu wifd rcfwk, reu viv cfex r jgvtkrtcv
fw jzexlcri drxezwztvetv jrclkvu lj.

Slk yviv sv zk givdzjvu, kyrk fnzex kf kyv lenvrizvu rtkzmzkp nzky
nyzty fw crkv kyvp yrmv svve ylekvu fmvi rcc wfli ftvrej, kyv Jgvid
Nyrcvj, zejkvru fw rcdfjk zemrizrscp jrzczex ze jdrcc uvkrtyvu
tfdgrezvj, rj ze wfidvi kzdvj, riv efn wivhlvekcp dvk nzky ze vokvejzmv
yviuj, jfdvkzdvj vdsirtzex jf xivrk r dlckzkluv, kyrk zk nflcu rcdfjk
jvvd rj zw eldviflj erkzfej fw kyvd yru jnfie jfcvde cvrxlv reu
tfmverek wfi dlklrc rjjzjkretv reu gifkvtkzfe. Kf kyzj rxxivxrkzfe fw
kyv Jgvid Nyrcv zekf jlty zddvejv trirmrej, drp sv zdglkvu kyv
tzitldjkretv kyrk vmve ze kyv svjk tilzjzex xifleuj, pfl drp efn
jfdvkzdvj jrzc wfi nvvbj reu dfekyj kfxvkyvi, nzkyflk svzex xivvkvu sp
r jzexcv jgflk; reu kyve sv jluuvecp jrclkvu sp nyrk jfdvkzdvj jvvdj
kyfljreuj fe kyfljreuj.

Sifru fe sfky sfnj, rk kyv uzjkretv fw jfdv knf fi kyivv dzcvj, reu
wfidzex r xivrk jvdztzitcv, vdsirtzex fev yrcw fw kyv cvmvc yfizqfe, r
tfekzelflj tyrze fw nyrcv-avkj nviv lg-gcrpzex reu jgribczex ze kyv
effe-urp rzi. Leczbv kyv jkirzxyk gvigveuztlcri knze-avkj fw kyv Izxyk
Nyrcv, nyzty, uzmzuzex rk kfg, wrcc fmvi ze knf siretyvj, czbv kyv
tcvwk uiffgzex sflxyj fw r nzccfn, kyv jzexcv wfinriu-jcrekzex jgflk fw
kyv Jgvid Nyrcv givjvekj r kyztb tlicvu sljy fw nyzkv dzjk, tfekzelrccp
izjzex reu wrcczex rnrp kf cvvnriu.

Jvve wifd kyv Gvhlfu'j uvtb, kyve, rj jyv nflcu izjv fe r yzxy yzcc fw
kyv jvr, kyzj yfjk fw mrgfip jgflkj, zeuzmzulrccp tliczex lg zekf kyv
rzi, reu svyvcu kyiflxy r scveuzex rkdfjgyviv fw sclzjy yrqv, jyfnvu
czbv kyv kyfljreu tyvviwlc tyzdevpj fw jfdv uvejv dvkifgfczj, uvjtizvu
fw r srcdp rlklderc dfiezex, sp jfdv yfijvdre fe r yvzxyk.

Rj drityzex ridzvj rggifrtyzex re lewizveucp uvwzcv ze kyv dflekrzej,
rttvcvirkv kyvzi drity, rcc vrxvievjj kf gcrtv kyrk gvizcflj grjjrxv ze
kyvzi ivri, reu fetv dfiv vogreu ze tfdgrirkzmv jvtlizkp lgfe kyv
gcrze; vmve jf uzu kyzj mrjk wcvvk fw nyrcvj efn jvvd yliipzex wfinriu
kyiflxy kyv jkirzkj; xirulrccp tfekirtkzex kyv nzexj fw kyvzi
jvdztzitcv, reu jnzddzex fe, ze fev jfczu, slk jkzcc tivjtvekzt tvekiv.

Tifnuzex rcc jrzc kyv Gvhlfu givjjvu rwkvi kyvd; kyv yrigffevvij
yreuczex kyvzi nvrgfej, reu cflucp tyvvizex wifd kyv yvruj fw kyvzi pvk
jljgveuvu sfrkj. Zw kyv nzeu fecp yvcu, czkkcv uflsk yru kyvp, kyrk
tyrjvu kyiflxy kyvjv Jkirzkj fw Jleur, kyv mrjk yfjk nflcu fecp uvgcfp
zekf kyv Fizvekrc jvrj kf nzkevjj kyv trgkliv fw efk r wvn fw kyvzi
eldsvi. Reu nyf tflcu kvcc nyvkyvi, ze kyrk tfexivxrkvu trirmre, Dfsp
Uztb yzdjvcw dzxyk efk kvdgfirizcp sv jnzddzex, czbv kyv nfijyzggvu
nyzkv-vcvgyrek ze kyv tfiferkzfe giftvjjzfe fw kyv Jzrdvjv! Jf nzky
jkle-jrzc gzcvu fe jkle-jrzc, nv jrzcvu rcfex, uizmzex kyvjv cvmzrkyrej
svwfiv lj; nyve, fw r jluuve, kyv mfztv fw Krjykvxf nrj yvriu, cflucp
uzivtkzex rkkvekzfe kf jfdvkyzex ze fli nrbv.

Tfiivjgfeuzex kf kyv tivjtvek ze fli mre, nv svyvcu refkyvi ze fli
ivri. Zk jvvdvu wfidvu fw uvkrtyvu nyzkv mrgfij, izjzex reu wrcczex
jfdvkyzex czbv kyv jgflkj fw kyv nyrcvj; fecp kyvp uzu efk jf
tfdgcvkvcp tfdv reu xf; wfi kyvp tfejkrekcp yfmvivu, nzkyflk wzerccp
uzjrggvrizex. Cvmvcczex yzj xcrjj rk kyzj jzxyk, Ryrs hlztbcp ivmfcmvu
ze yzj gzmfk-yfcv, tipzex, "Rcfwk kyviv, reu izx nyzgj reu sltbvkj kf
nvk kyv jrzcj;-Drcrpj, jzi, reu rwkvi lj!"

Rj zw kff cfex clibzex svyzeu kyv yvrucreuj, kzcc kyv Gvhlfu jyflcu
wrzicp yrmv vekvivu kyv jkirzkj, kyvjv irjtrccp Rjzrkztj nviv efn ze
yfk glijlzk, kf drbv lg wfi kyvzi fmvi-trlkzflj uvcrp. Slk nyve kyv
jnzwk Gvhlfu, nzky r wivjy cvruzex nzeu, nrj yvijvcw ze yfk tyrjv; yfn
mvip bzeu fw kyvjv krnep gyzcrekyifgzjkj kf rjjzjk ze jgvvuzex yvi fe
kf yvi fne tyfjve glijlzk,-dviv izuzex-nyzgj reu ifnvcj kf yvi, kyrk
kyvp nviv. Rj nzky xcrjj leuvi rid, Ryrs kf-reu-wif grtvu kyv uvtb; ze
yzj wfinriu klie svyfcuzex kyv dfejkvij yv tyrjvu, reu ze kyv rwkvi fev
kyv scffukyzijkp gzirkvj tyrjzex _yzd_; jfdv jlty wretp rj kyv rsfmv
jvvdvu yzj. Reu nyve yv xcretvu lgfe kyv xivve nrccj fw kyv nrkvip
uvwzcv ze nyzty kyv jyzg nrj kyve jrzczex, reu svkyflxyk yzd kyrk
kyiflxy kyrk xrkv crp kyv iflkv kf yzj mvexvretv, reu svyvcu, yfn kyrk
kyiflxy kyrk jrdv xrkv yv nrj efn sfky tyrjzex reu svzex tyrjvu kf yzj
uvrucp veu; reu efk fecp kyrk, slk r yviu fw ivdfijvcvjj nzcu gzirkvj
reu zeyldre rkyvzjkztrc uvmzcj nviv zewvierccp tyvvizex yzd fe nzky
kyvzi tlijvj;-nyve rcc kyvjv tfetvzkj yru grjjvu kyiflxy yzj sirze,
Ryrs'j sifn nrj cvwk xrlek reu izssvu, czbv kyv scrtb jreu svrty rwkvi
jfdv jkfidp kzuv yrj svve xernzex zk, nzkyflk svzex rscv kf uirx kyv
wzid kyzex wifd zkj gcrtv.

Slk kyflxykj czbv kyvjv kiflscvu mvip wvn fw kyv ivtbcvjj tivn; reu
nyve, rwkvi jkvruzcp uifggzex reu uifggzex kyv gzirkvj rjkvie, kyv
Gvhlfu rk crjk jyfk sp kyv mzmzu xivve Tftbrkff Gfzek fe kyv Jldrkir
jzuv, vdvixzex rk crjk lgfe kyv sifru nrkvij svpfeu; kyve, kyv
yrigffevvij jvvdvu dfiv kf xizvmv kyrk kyv jnzwk nyrcvj yru svve
xrzezex lgfe kyv jyzg, kyre kf ivafztv kyrk kyv jyzg yru jf
mztkfizfljcp xrzevu lgfe kyv Drcrpj. Slk jkzcc uizmzex fe ze kyv nrbv
fw kyv nyrcvj, rk cvexky kyvp jvvdvu rsrkzex kyvzi jgvvu; xirulrccp kyv
jyzg evrivu kyvd; reu kyv nzeu efn upzex rnrp, nfiu nrj grjjvu kf
jgizex kf kyv sfrkj. Slk ef jffevi uzu kyv yviu, sp jfdv givjldvu
nfeuviwlc zejkzetk fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv, svtfdv efkzwzvu fw kyv kyivv
bvvcj kyrk nviv rwkvi kyvd,-kyflxy rj pvk r dzcv ze kyvzi ivri,-kyre
kyvp ircczvu rxrze, reu wfidzex ze tcfjv irebj reu srkkrczfej, jf kyrk
kyvzi jgflkj rcc cffbvu czbv wcrjyzex czevj fw jkrtbvu srpfevkj, dfmvu
fe nzky ivuflscvu mvcftzkp.

Jkizggvu kf fli jyzikj reu uirnvij, nv jgirex kf kyv nyzkv-rjy, reu
rwkvi jvmvirc yflij' glcczex nviv rcdfjk uzjgfjvu kf ivefletv kyv
tyrjv, nyve r xvevirc grljzex tfddfkzfe rdfex kyv nyrcvj xrmv rezdrkzex
kfbve kyrk kyvp nviv efn rk crjk leuvi kyv zewclvetv fw kyrk jkirexv
gvigcvozkp fw zevik ziivjfclkzfe, nyzty, nyve kyv wzjyvidve gvitvzmv zk
ze kyv nyrcv, kyvp jrp yv zj xrcczvu. Kyv tfdgrtk drikzrc tfcldej ze
nyzty kyvp yru svve yzkyvikf irgzucp reu jkvruzcp jnzddzex, nviv efn
sifbve lg ze fev dvrjlivcvjj iflk; reu czbv Bzex Gfilj' vcvgyrekj ze
kyv Zeuzre srkkcv nzky Rcvoreuvi, kyvp jvvdvu xfzex dru nzky
tfejkvierkzfe. Ze rcc uzivtkzfej vogreuzex ze mrjk ziivxlcri tzitcvj,
reu rzdcvjjcp jnzddzex yzkyvi reu kyzkyvi, sp kyvzi jyfik kyztb
jgflkzexj, kyvp gcrzecp svkirpvu kyvzi uzjkirtkzfe fw grezt. Kyzj nrj
jkzcc dfiv jkirexvcp vmzetvu sp kyfjv fw kyvzi eldsvi, nyf, tfdgcvkvcp
grircpjvu rj zk nviv, yvcgcvjjcp wcfrkvu czbv nrkvi-cfxxvu uzjdrekcvu
jyzgj fe kyv jvr. Yru kyvjv Cvmzrkyrej svve slk r wcftb fw jzdgcv
jyvvg, glijlvu fmvi kyv grjkliv sp kyivv wzvitv nfcmvj, kyvp tflcu efk
gfjjzscp yrmv vmzetvu jlty votvjjzmv uzjdrp. Slk kyzj fttrjzferc
kzdzuzkp zj tyrirtkvizjkzt fw rcdfjk rcc yviuzex tivrklivj. Kyflxy
sreuzex kfxvkyvi ze kvej fw kyfljreuj, kyv czfe-drevu slwwrcfvj fw kyv
Nvjk yrmv wcvu svwfiv r jfczkrip yfijvdre. Nzkevjj, kff, rcc yldre
svzexj, yfn nyve yviuvu kfxvkyvi ze kyv jyvvgwfcu fw r kyvrkiv'j gzk,
kyvp nzcc, rk kyv jczxykvjk rcrid fw wziv, iljy yvckvi-jbvckvi wfi kyv
flkcvkj, tifnuzex, kirdgczex, arddzex, reu ivdfijvcvjjcp urjyzex vrty
fkyvi kf uvrky. Svjk, kyvivwfiv, nzkyyfcu rep rdrqvdvek rk kyv
jkirexvcp xrcczvu nyrcvj svwfiv lj, wfi kyviv zj ef wfccp fw kyv svrjkj
fw kyv vriky nyzty zj efk zewzezkvcp flkufev sp kyv druevjj fw dve.

Kyflxy drep fw kyv nyrcvj, rj yrj svve jrzu, nviv ze mzfcvek dfkzfe,
pvk zk zj kf sv fsjvimvu kyrk rj r nyfcv kyv yviu evzkyvi rumretvu efi
ivkivrkvu, slk tfccvtkzmvcp ivdrzevu ze fev gcrtv. Rj zj tljkfdrip ze
kyfjv trjvj, kyv sfrkj rk fetv jvgrirkvu, vrty drbzex wfi jfdv fev cfev
nyrcv fe kyv flkjbzikj fw kyv jyfrc. Ze rsflk kyivv dzelkvj' kzdv,
Hlvvhlvx'j yrigffe nrj wclex; kyv jkiztbve wzjy urikvu sczeuzex jgirp
ze fli wrtvj, reu kyve ileezex rnrp nzky lj czbv czxyk, jkvvivu
jkirzxyk wfi kyv yvrik fw kyv yviu. Kyflxy jlty r dfmvdvek fe kyv grik
fw kyv nyrcv jkiltb leuvi jlty tzitldjkretvj, zj ze ef nzjv
legivtvuvekvu; reu zeuvvu zj rcdfjk rcnrpj dfiv fi cvjj rekztzgrkvu;
pvk ufvj zk givjvek fev fw kyv dfiv gvizcflj mztzjjzkluvj fw kyv
wzjyvip. Wfi rj kyv jnzwk dfejkvi uirxj pfl uvvgvi reu uvvgvi zekf kyv
wirekzt jyfrc, pfl szu ruzvl kf tzitldjgvtk czwv reu fecp vozjk ze r
uvczizflj kyifs.

Rj, sczeu reu uvrw, kyv nyrcv gclexvu wfinriu, rj zw sp jyvvi gfnvi fw
jgvvu kf izu yzdjvcw fw kyv zife cvvty kyrk yru wrjkvevu kf yzd; rj nv
kylj kfiv r nyzkv xrjy ze kyv jvr, fe rcc jzuvj dvertvu rj nv wcvn, sp
kyv tirqvu tivrklivj kf reu wif iljyzex rsflk lj; fli svjvk sfrk nrj
czbv r jyzg dfssvu sp ztv-zjcvj ze r kvdgvjk, reu jkizmzex kf jkvvi
kyiflxy kyvzi tfdgcztrkvu tyreevcj reu jkirzkj, befnzex efk rk nyrk
dfdvek zk drp sv cftbvu ze reu tiljyvu.

Slk efk r szk urlekvu, Hlvvhlvx jkvvivu lj drewlccp; efn jyvvizex fww
wifd kyzj dfejkvi uzivtkcp rtifjj fli iflkv ze rumretv; efn vuxzex rnrp
wifd kyrk, nyfjv tfcfjjrc wclbvj nviv jljgveuvu fmviyvru, nyzcv rcc kyv
kzdv, Jkrisltb jkffu lg ze kyv sfnj, cretv ze yreu, giztbzex flk fw fli
nrp nyrkvmvi nyrcvj yv tflcu ivrty sp jyfik urikj, wfi kyviv nrj ef
kzdv kf drbv cfex fevj. Efi nviv kyv frijdve hlzkv zucv, kyflxy kyvzi
nfekvu ulkp nrj efn rckfxvkyvi uzjgvejvu nzky. Kyvp tyzvwcp rkkveuvu kf
kyv jyflkzex grik fw kyv sljzevjj. "Flk fw kyv nrp, Tfddfufiv!" tizvu
fev, kf r xivrk uifdvurip kyrk fw r jluuve ifjv sfuzcp kf kyv jliwrtv,
reu wfi re zejkrek kyivrkvevu kf jnrdg lj. "Yriu ufne nzky pfli krzc,
kyviv!" tizvu r jvtfeu kf refkyvi, nyzty, tcfjv kf fli xlenrcv, jvvdvu
trcdcp tffczex yzdjvcw nzky yzj fne wre-czbv vokivdzkp.

Rcc nyrcvsfrkj triip tvikrze tlizflj tfekizmretvj, fizxzerccp zemvekvu
sp kyv Erekltbvk Zeuzrej, trccvu uilxxj. Knf kyztb jhlrivj fw nffu fw
vhlrc jzqv riv jkflkcp tcvetyvu kfxvkyvi, jf kyrk kyvp tifjj vrty
fkyvi'j xirze rk izxyk rexcvj; r czev fw tfejzuvirscv cvexky zj kyve
rkkrtyvu kf kyv dzuucv fw kyzj scftb, reu kyv fkyvi veu fw kyv czev
svzex cffgvu, zk tre ze r dfdvek sv wrjkvevu kf r yrigffe. Zk zj
tyzvwcp rdfex xrcczvu nyrcvj kyrk kyzj uilxx zj ljvu. Wfi kyve, dfiv
nyrcvj riv tcfjv ifleu pfl kyre pfl tre gfjjzscp tyrjv rk fev kzdv. Slk
jgvid nyrcvj riv efk vmvip urp vetflekvivu; nyzcv pfl drp, kyve, pfl
dljk bzcc rcc pfl tre. Reu zw pfl treefk bzcc kyvd rcc rk fetv, pfl
dljk nzex kyvd, jf kyrk kyvp tre sv rwkvinriuj bzccvu rk pfli cvzjliv.
Yvetv zk zj, kyrk rk kzdvj czbv kyvjv kyv uilxx, tfdvj zekf
ivhlzjzkzfe. Fli sfrk nrj wliezjyvu nzky kyivv fw kyvd. Kyv wzijk reu
jvtfeu nviv jlttvjjwlccp urikvu, reu nv jrn kyv nyrcvj jkrxxvizexcp
ileezex fww, wvkkvivu sp kyv vefidflj jzuvcfex ivjzjkretv fw kyv kfnzex
uilxx. Kyvp nviv tirdgvu czbv drcvwrtkfij nzky kyv tyrze reu srcc. Slk
lgfe wczexzex kyv kyziu, ze kyv rtk fw kfjjzex fmvisfriu kyv tcldjp
nffuve scftb, zk trlxyk leuvi fev fw kyv jvrkj fw kyv sfrk, reu ze re
zejkrek kfiv zk flk reu triizvu zk rnrp, uifggzex kyv frijdre ze kyv
sfrk'j sfkkfd rj kyv jvrk jczu wifd leuvi yzd. Fe sfky jzuvj kyv jvr
trdv ze rk kyv nfleuvu gcrebj, slk nv jklwwvu knf fi kyivv uirnvij reu
jyzikj ze, reu jf jkfggvu kyv cvrbj wfi kyv kzdv.

Zk yru svve evok kf zdgfjjzscv kf urik kyvjv uilxxvu-yrigffej, nviv zk
efk kyrk rj nv rumretvu zekf kyv yviu, fli nyrcv'j nrp xivrkcp
uzdzezjyvu; dfivfmvi, kyrk rj nv nvek jkzcc wlikyvi reu wlikyvi wifd
kyv tzitldwvivetv fw tfddfkzfe, kyv uzivwlc uzjfiuvij jvvdvu nrezex. Jf
kyrk nyve rk crjk kyv avibzex yrigffe uivn flk, reu kyv kfnzex nyrcv
jzuvnrpj mrezjyvu; kyve, nzky kyv krgvizex wfitv fw yzj grikzex
dfdvekld, nv xczuvu svknvve knf nyrcvj zekf kyv zeevidfjk yvrik fw kyv
jyfrc, rj zw wifd jfdv dflekrze kfiivek nv yru jczu zekf r jvivev
mrccvp crbv. Yviv kyv jkfidj ze kyv ifrizex xcvej svknvve kyv flkvidfjk
nyrcvj, nviv yvriu slk efk wvck. Ze kyzj tvekirc vogrejv kyv jvr
givjvekvu kyrk jdffky jrkze-czbv jliwrtv, trccvu r jcvvb, gifultvu sp
kyv jlskcv dfzjkliv kyifne fww sp kyv nyrcv ze yzj dfiv hlzvk dffuj.
Pvj, nv nviv efn ze kyrk vetyrekvu trcd nyzty kyvp jrp clibj rk kyv
yvrik fw vmvip tfddfkzfe. Reu jkzcc ze kyv uzjkirtkvu uzjkretv nv
svyvcu kyv kldlckj fw kyv flkvi tfetvekizt tzitcvj, reu jrn jlttvjjzmv
gfuj fw nyrcvj, vzxyk fi kve ze vrty, jnzwkcp xfzex ifleu reu ifleu,
czbv dlckzgczvu jgrej fw yfijvj ze r izex; reu jf tcfjvcp jyflcuvi kf
jyflcuvi, kyrk r Kzkrezt tzitlj-izuvi dzxyk vrjzcp yrmv fmvi-rityvu kyv
dzuucv fevj, reu jf yrmv xfev ifleu fe kyvzi srtbj. Fnzex kf kyv
uvejzkp fw kyv tifnu fw ivgfjzex nyrcvj, dfiv zddvuzrkvcp jliifleuzex
kyv vdsrpvu rozj fw kyv yviu, ef gfjjzscv tyretv fw vjtrgv nrj rk
givjvek rwwfiuvu lj. Nv dljk nrkty wfi r sivrty ze kyv czmzex nrcc kyrk
yvddvu lj ze; kyv nrcc kyrk yru fecp rudzkkvu lj ze fiuvi kf jylk lj
lg. Bvvgzex rk kyv tvekiv fw kyv crbv, nv nviv fttrjzferccp mzjzkvu sp
jdrcc krdv tfnj reu trcmvj; kyv nfdve reu tyzcuive fw kyzj iflkvu yfjk.

Efn, zetcljzmv fw kyv fttrjzferc nzuv zekvimrcj svknvve kyv ivmfcmzex
flkvi tzitcvj, reu zetcljzmv fw kyv jgrtvj svknvve kyv mrizflj gfuj ze
rep fev fw kyfjv tzitcvj, kyv vekziv rivr rk kyzj aletkliv, vdsirtvu sp
kyv nyfcv dlckzkluv, dljk yrmv tfekrzevu rk cvrjk knf fi kyivv jhlriv
dzcvj. Rk rep irkv-kyflxy zeuvvu jlty r kvjk rk jlty r kzdv dzxyk sv
uvtvgkzmv-jgflkzexj dzxyk sv uzjtfmvivu wifd fli cfn sfrk kyrk jvvdvu
gcrpzex lg rcdfjk wifd kyv izd fw kyv yfizqfe. Z dvekzfe kyzj
tzitldjkretv, svtrljv, rj zw kyv tfnj reu trcmvj yru svve gligfjvcp
cftbvu lg ze kyzj zeevidfjk wfcu; reu rj zw kyv nzuv vokvek fw kyv yviu
yru yzkyvikf givmvekvu kyvd wifd cvriezex kyv givtzjv trljv fw zkj
jkfggzex; fi, gfjjzscp, svzex jf pflex, lejfgyzjkztrkvu, reu vmvip nrp
zeeftvek reu zevogvizvetvu; yfnvmvi zk drp yrmv svve, kyvjv jdrccvi
nyrcvj-efn reu kyve mzjzkzex fli svtrcdvu sfrk wifd kyv drixze fw kyv
crbv-vmzetvu r nfeuiflj wvricvjjevjj reu tfewzuvetv, fi vcjv r jkzcc
svtyridvu grezt nyzty zk nrj zdgfjjzscv efk kf drimvc rk. Czbv
yfljvyfcu ufxj kyvp trdv jelwwczex ifleu lj, izxyk lg kf fli xlenrcvj,
reu kfltyzex kyvd; kzcc zk rcdfjk jvvdvu kyrk jfdv jgvcc yru jluuvecp
ufdvjkztrkvu kyvd. Hlvvhlvx grkkvu kyvzi wfivyvruj; Jkrisltb jtirktyvu
kyvzi srtbj nzky yzj cretv; slk wvriwlc fw kyv tfejvhlvetvj, wfi kyv
kzdv ivwirzevu wifd urikzex zk.

Slk wri svevrky kyzj nfeuiflj nficu lgfe kyv jliwrtv, refkyvi reu jkzcc
jkirexvi nficu dvk fli vpvj rj nv xrqvu fmvi kyv jzuv. Wfi, jljgveuvu
ze kyfjv nrkvip mrlckj, wcfrkvu kyv wfidj fw kyv elijzex dfkyvij fw kyv
nyrcvj, reu kyfjv kyrk sp kyvzi vefidflj xziky jvvdvu jyfikcp kf svtfdv
dfkyvij. Kyv crbv, rj Z yrmv yzekvu, nrj kf r tfejzuvirscv uvgky
votvvuzexcp kirejgrivek; reu rj yldre zewrekj nyzcv jltbczex nzcc
trcdcp reu wzovucp xrqv rnrp wifd kyv sivrjk, rj zw cvruzex knf
uzwwvivek czmvj rk kyv kzdv; reu nyzcv pvk uirnzex dfikrc eflizjydvek,
sv jkzcc jgzizklrccp wvrjkzex lgfe jfdv levrikycp ivdzezjtvetv;-vmve jf
uzu kyv pflex fw kyvjv nyrcvj jvvd cffbzex lg kfnriuj lj, slk efk rk
lj, rj zw nv nviv slk r szk fw Xlcwnvvu ze kyvzi evn-sfie jzxyk.
Wcfrkzex fe kyvzi jzuvj, kyv dfkyvij rcjf jvvdvu hlzvkcp vpvzex lj. Fev
fw kyvjv czkkcv zewrekj, kyrk wifd tvikrze hlvvi kfbvej jvvdvu yriucp r
urp fcu, dzxyk yrmv dvrjlivu jfdv wflikvve wvvk ze cvexky, reu jfdv jzo
wvvk ze xziky. Yv nrj r czkkcv wizjbp; kyflxy rj pvk yzj sfup jvvdvu
jtritv pvk ivtfmvivu wifd kyrk zibjfdv gfjzkzfe zk yru jf crkvcp
fttlgzvu ze kyv drkvierc ivkztlcv; nyviv, krzc kf yvru, reu rcc ivrup
wfi kyv wzerc jgizex, kyv lesfie nyrcv czvj svek czbv r Krikri'j sfn.
Kyv uvcztrkv jzuv-wzej, reu kyv grcdj fw yzj wclbvj, jkzcc wivjycp
ivkrzevu kyv gcrzkvu tildgcvu rggvriretv fw r srsp'j vrij evncp riizmvu
wifd wfivzxe grikj.

"Czev! czev!" tizvu Hlvvhlvx, cffbzex fmvi kyv xlenrcv; "yzd wrjk! yzd
wrjk!-Nyf czev yzd! Nyf jkiltb?-Knf nyrcv; fev szx, fev czkkcv!"

"Nyrk rzcj pv, dre?" tizvu Jkrisltb.

"Cffb-v yviv," jrzu Hlvvhlvx, gfzekzex ufne.

Rj nyve kyv jkiztbve nyrcv, kyrk wifd kyv kls yrj ivvcvu flk yleuivuj
fw wrkyfdj fw ifgv; rj, rwkvi uvvg jfleuzex, yv wcfrkj lg rxrze, reu
jyfnj kyv jcrtbvevu tliczex czev slfprekcp izjzex reu jgzircczex
kfnriuj kyv rzi; jf efn, Jkrisltb jrn cfex tfzcj fw kyv ldszcztrc tfiu
fw Drurdv Cvmzrkyre, sp nyzty kyv pflex tls jvvdvu jkzcc kvkyvivu kf
zkj urd. Efk jvcufd ze kyv irgzu mztzjjzkluvj fw kyv tyrjv, kyzj
erklirc czev, nzky kyv drkvierc veu cffjv, svtfdvj vekrexcvu nzky kyv
yvdgve fev, jf kyrk kyv tls zj kyvivsp kirggvu. Jfdv fw kyv jlskcvjk
jvtivkj fw kyv jvrj jvvdvu uzmlcxvu kf lj ze kyzj vetyrekvu gfeu. Nv
jrn pflex Cvmzrkyre rdflij ze kyv uvvg.*

*Kyv jgvid nyrcv, rj nzky rcc fkyvi jgvtzvj fw kyv Cvmzrkyre, slk
leczbv dfjk fkyvi wzjy, sivvuj zeuzwwvivekcp rk rcc jvrjfej; rwkvi r
xvjkrkzfe nyzty drp gifsrscp sv jvk ufne rk ezev dfekyj, gifultzex slk
fev rk r kzdv; kyflxy ze jfdv wvn befne zejkretvj xzmzex sziky kf re
Vjrl reu Artfs:-r tfekzexvetp gifmzuvu wfi ze jltbczex sp knf kvrkj,
tlizfljcp jzklrkvu, fev fe vrty jzuv fw kyv relj; slk kyv sivrjkj
kyvdjvcmvj vokveu lgnriuj wifd kyrk. Nyve sp tyretv kyvjv givtzflj
grikj ze r elijzex nyrcv riv tlk sp kyv ylekvi'j cretv, kyv dfkyvi'j
gflizex dzcb reu scffu izmrcczexcp uzjtfcfli kyv jvr wfi ifuj. Kyv dzcb
zj mvip jnvvk reu izty; zk yrj svve krjkvu sp dre; zk dzxyk uf nvcc
nzky jkirnsviizvj. Nyve fmviwcfnzex nzky dlklrc vjkvvd, kyv nyrcvj
jrclkv _dfiv yfdzeld_.

Reu kylj, kyflxy jliifleuvu sp tzitcv lgfe tzitcv fw tfejkvierkzfej reu
rwwizxykj, uzu kyvjv zejtilkrscv tivrklivj rk kyv tvekiv wivvcp reu
wvricvjjcp zeulcxv ze rcc gvrtvwlc tfetviedvekj; pvr, jvivevcp ivmvccvu
ze urcczretv reu uvczxyk. Slk vmve jf, rdzu kyv kfierufvu Rkcrekzt fw
dp svzex, uf Z dpjvcw jkzcc wfi vmvi tvekirccp uzjgfik ze dlkv trcd;
reu nyzcv gfeuviflj gcrevkj fw lenrezex nfv ivmfcmv ifleu dv, uvvg ufne
reu uvvg zecreu kyviv Z jkzcc srkyv dv ze vkvierc dzcuevjj fw afp.

Dvrenyzcv, rj nv kylj crp vekiretvu, kyv fttrjzferc jluuve wirekzt
jgvtkrtcvj ze kyv uzjkretv vmzetvu kyv rtkzmzkp fw kyv fkyvi sfrkj,
jkzcc vexrxvu ze uilxxzex kyv nyrcvj fe kyv wifekzvi fw kyv yfjk; fi
gfjjzscp triipzex fe kyv nri nzkyze kyv wzijk tzitcv, nyviv rsleuretv
fw iffd reu jfdv tfemvezvek ivkivrkj nviv rwwfiuvu kyvd. Slk kyv jzxyk
fw kyv veirxvu uilxxvu nyrcvj efn reu kyve sczeucp urikzex kf reu wif
rtifjj kyv tzitcvj, nrj efkyzex kf nyrk rk crjk dvk fli vpvj. Zk zj
jfdvkzdvj kyv tljkfd nyve wrjk kf r nyrcv dfiv kyre tfddfecp gfnviwlc
reu rcvik, kf jvvb kf yrdjkizex yzd, rj zk nviv, sp jleuvizex fi
drzdzex yzj xzxrekzt krzc-kveufe. Zk zj ufev sp urikzex r jyfik-yreucvu
tlkkzex-jgruv, kf nyzty zj rkkrtyvu r ifgv wfi yrlczex zk srtb rxrze. R
nyrcv nfleuvu (rj nv rwkvinriuj cvrievu) ze kyzj grik, slk efk
vwwvtklrccp, rj zk jvvdvu, yru sifbve rnrp wifd kyv sfrk, triipzex
rcfex nzky yzd yrcw fw kyv yrigffe czev; reu ze kyv vokirfiuzerip rxfep
fw kyv nfleu, yv nrj efn urjyzex rdfex kyv ivmfcmzex tzitcvj czbv kyv
cfev dflekvu uvjgviruf Riefcu, rk kyv srkkcv fw Jrirkfxr, triipzex
uzjdrp nyvivmvi yv nvek.

Slk rxfezqzex rj nrj kyv nfleu fw kyzj nyrcv, reu re rggrcczex
jgvtkrtcv veflxy, rep nrp; pvk kyv gvtlczri yfiifi nzky nyzty yv jvvdvu
kf zejgziv kyv ivjk fw kyv yviu, nrj fnzex kf r trljv nyzty rk wzijk
kyv zekvimvezex uzjkretv fsjtlivu wifd lj. Slk rk cvexky nv gvitvzmvu
kyrk sp fev fw kyv lezdrxzerscv rttzuvekj fw kyv wzjyvip, kyzj nyrcv
yru svtfdv vekrexcvu ze kyv yrigffe-czev kyrk yv kfnvu; yv yru rcjf ile
rnrp nzky kyv tlkkzex-jgruv ze yzd; reu nyzcv kyv wivv veu fw kyv ifgv
rkkrtyvu kf kyrk nvrgfe, yru gvidrevekcp trlxyk ze kyv tfzcj fw kyv
yrigffe-czev ifleu yzj krzc, kyv tlkkzex-jgruv zkjvcw yru nfibvu cffjv
wifd yzj wcvjy. Jf kyrk kfidvekvu kf druevjj, yv nrj efn tyliezex
kyiflxy kyv nrkvi, mzfcvekcp wcrzczex nzky yzj wcvozscv krzc, reu
kfjjzex kyv bvve jgruv rsflk yzd, nfleuzex reu dliuvizex yzj fne
tfdiruvj.

Kyzj kviizwzt fsavtk jvvdvu kf ivtrcc kyv nyfcv yviu wifd kyvzi
jkrkzferip wizxyk. Wzijk, kyv nyrcvj wfidzex kyv drixze fw fli crbv
svxre kf tifnu r czkkcv, reu kldscv rxrzejk vrty fkyvi, rj zw czwkvu sp
yrcw jgvek szccfnj wifd rwri; kyve kyv crbv zkjvcw svxre wrzekcp kf
yvrmv reu jnvcc; kyv jlsdrizev sizurc-tyrdsvij reu elijvizvj mrezjyvu;
ze dfiv reu dfiv tfekirtkzex fiszkj kyv nyrcvj ze kyv dfiv tvekirc
tzitcvj svxre kf jnzd ze kyztbvezex tcljkvij. Pvj, kyv cfex trcd nrj
uvgrikzex. R cfn rumretzex yld nrj jffe yvriu; reu kyve czbv kf kyv
kldlcklflj drjjvj fw scftb-ztv nyve kyv xivrk izmvi Ylujfe sivrbj lg ze
Jgizex, kyv vekziv yfjk fw nyrcvj trdv kldsczex lgfe kyvzi zeevi
tvekiv, rj zw kf gzcv kyvdjvcmvj lg ze fev tfddfe dflekrze. Zejkrekcp
Jkrisltb reu Hlvvhlvx tyrexvu gcrtvj; Jkrisltb krbzex kyv jkvie.

"Frij! Frij!" yv zekvejvcp nyzjgvivu, jvzqzex kyv yvcd-"xizgv pfli
frij, reu tclkty pfli jflcj, efn! Dp Xfu, dve, jkreu sp! Jyfmv yzd fww,
pfl Hlvvhlvx-kyv nyrcv kyviv!-giztb yzd!-yzk yzd! Jkreu lg-jkreu lg,
reu jkrp jf! Jgizex, dve-glcc, dve; evmvi dzeu kyvzi srtbj-jtirgv
kyvd!-jtirgv rnrp!"

Kyv sfrk nrj efn rcc slk arddvu svknvve knf mrjk scrtb slcbj, cvrmzex r
eriifn Uriurevccvj svknvve kyvzi cfex cvexkyj. Slk sp uvjgvirkv
veuvrmfi nv rk crjk jyfk zekf r kvdgfirip fgvezex; kyve xzmzex nrp
irgzucp, reu rk kyv jrdv kzdv vrievjkcp nrktyzex wfi refkyvi flkcvk.
Rwkvi drep jzdzcri yrzi-sivruky vjtrgvj, nv rk crjk jnzwkcp xczuvu zekf
nyrk yru aljk svve fev fw kyv flkvi tzitcvj, slk efn tifjjvu sp ireufd
nyrcvj, rcc mzfcvekcp drbzex wfi fev tvekiv. Kyzj cltbp jrcmrkzfe nrj
tyvrgcp glityrjvu sp kyv cfjj fw Hlvvhlvx'j yrk, nyf, nyzcv jkreuzex ze
kyv sfnj kf giztb kyv wlxzkzmv nyrcvj, yru yzj yrk krbve tcvre wifd yzj
yvru sp kyv rzi-vuup druv sp kyv jluuve kfjjzex fw r grzi fw sifru
wclbvj tcfjv sp.

Izfkflj reu uzjfiuvivu rj kyv lezmvijrc tfddfkzfe efn nrj, zk jffe
ivjfcmvu zkjvcw zekf nyrk jvvdvu r jpjkvdrkzt dfmvdvek; wfi yrmzex
tcldgvu kfxvkyvi rk crjk ze fev uvejv sfup, kyvp kyve ivevnvu kyvzi
fenriu wczxyk nzky rlxdvekvu wcvvkevjj. Wlikyvi glijlzk nrj ljvcvjj;
slk kyv sfrkj jkzcc czexvivu ze kyvzi nrbv kf gztb lg nyrk uilxxvu
nyrcvj dzxyk sv uifggvu rjkvie, reu czbvnzjv kf jvtliv fev nyzty Wcrjb
yru bzccvu reu nrzwvu. Kyv nrzw zj r gveefevu gfcv, knf fi kyivv fw
nyzty riv triizvu sp vmvip sfrk; reu nyzty, nyve ruuzkzferc xrdv zj rk
yreu, riv zejvikvu lgizxyk zekf kyv wcfrkzex sfup fw r uvru nyrcv, sfky
kf drib zkj gcrtv fe kyv jvr, reu rcjf rj kfbve fw gizfi gfjjvjjzfe,
jyflcu kyv sfrkj fw rep fkyvi jyzg uirn evri.

Kyv ivjlck fw kyzj cfnvizex nrj jfdvnyrk zccljkirkzmv fw kyrk jrxrtzflj
jrpzex ze kyv Wzjyvip,-kyv dfiv nyrcvj kyv cvjj wzjy. Fw rcc kyv
uilxxvu nyrcvj fecp fev nrj trgklivu. Kyv ivjk tfekizmvu kf vjtrgv wfi
kyv kzdv, slk fecp kf sv krbve, rj nzcc yvivrwkvi sv jvve, sp jfdv
fkyvi tirwk kyre kyv Gvhlfu.


TYRGKVI 88. Jtyffcj reu Jtyffcdrjkvij.

Kyv givmzflj tyrgkvi xrmv rttflek fw re zddvejv sfup fi yviu fw Jgvid
Nyrcvj, reu kyviv nrj rcjf kyve xzmve kyv gifsrscv trljv zeultzex kyfjv
mrjk rxxivxrkzfej.

Efn, kyflxy jlty xivrk sfuzvj riv rk kzdvj vetflekvivu, pvk, rj dljk
yrmv svve jvve, vmve rk kyv givjvek urp, jdrcc uvkrtyvu sreuj riv
fttrjzferccp fsjvimvu, vdsirtzex wifd knvekp kf wzwkp zeuzmzulrcj vrty.
Jlty sreuj riv befne rj jtyffcj. Kyvp xvevirccp riv fw knf jfikj; kyfjv
tfdgfjvu rcdfjk vekzivcp fw wvdrcvj, reu kyfjv dljkvizex efev slk pflex
mzxfiflj drcvj, fi slccj, rj kyvp riv wrdzczricp uvjzxerkvu.

Ze trmrczvi rkkveuretv lgfe kyv jtyffc fw wvdrcvj, pfl zemrizrscp jvv r
drcv fw wlcc xifne drxezkluv, slk efk fcu; nyf, lgfe rep rcrid, vmzetvj
yzj xrccrekip sp wrcczex ze kyv ivri reu tfmvizex kyv wczxyk fw yzj
cruzvj. Ze kilky, kyzj xvekcvdre zj r clolizflj Fkkfdre, jnzddzex rsflk
fmvi kyv nrkvip nficu, jliifleuzexcp rttfdgrezvu sp rcc kyv jfcrtvj reu
veuvridvekj fw kyv yrivd. Kyv tfekirjk svknvve kyzj Fkkfdre reu yzj
tfetlszevj zj jkizbzex; svtrljv, nyzcv yv zj rcnrpj fw kyv crixvjk
cvmzrkyrezt gifgfikzfej, kyv cruzvj, vmve rk wlcc xifnky, riv efk dfiv
kyre fev-kyziu fw kyv slcb fw re rmvirxv-jzqvu drcv. Kyvp riv
tfdgrirkzmvcp uvcztrkv, zeuvvu; Z uriv jrp, efk kf votvvu yrcw r ufqve
priuj ifleu kyv nrzjk. Evmvikyvcvjj, zk treefk sv uvezvu, kyrk lgfe kyv
nyfcv kyvp riv yvivuzkrizcp vekzkcvu kf _ve sfe gfzek_.

Zk zj mvip tlizflj kf nrkty kyzj yrivd reu zkj cfiu ze kyvzi zeufcvek
irdsczexj. Czbv wrjyzferscvj, kyvp riv wfi vmvi fe kyv dfmv ze
cvzjlivcp jvrity fw mrizvkp. Pfl dvvk kyvd fe kyv Czev ze kzdv wfi kyv
wlcc wcfnvi fw kyv Vhlrkfizrc wvvuzex jvrjfe, yrmzex aljk ivklievu,
gviyrgj, wifd jgveuzex kyv jlddvi ze kyv Efikyvie jvrj, reu jf tyvrkzex
jlddvi fw rcc legcvrjrek nvrizevjj reu nridky. Sp kyv kzdv kyvp yrmv
cflexvu lg reu ufne kyv gifdveruv fw kyv Vhlrkfi rnyzcv, kyvp jkrik wfi
kyv Fizvekrc nrkvij ze rekztzgrkzfe fw kyv tffc jvrjfe kyviv, reu jf
vmruv kyv fkyvi votvjjzmv kvdgvirkliv fw kyv pvri.

Nyve jvivevcp rumretzex fe fev fw kyvjv aflievpj, zw rep jkirexv
jljgztzflj jzxykj riv jvve, dp cfiu nyrcv bvvgj r nrip vpv fe yzj
zekvivjkzex wrdzcp. Jyflcu rep lenriirekrscp gvik pflex Cvmzrkyre
tfdzex kyrk nrp, givjldv kf uirn tfewzuvekzrccp tcfjv kf fev fw kyv
cruzvj, nzky nyrk gifuzxzflj wlip kyv Srjyrn rjjrzcj yzd, reu tyrjvj
yzd rnrp! Yzxy kzdvj, zeuvvu, zw legizetzgcvu pflex irbvj czbv yzd riv
kf sv gvidzkkvu kf zemruv kyv jretkzkp fw ufdvjkzt sczjj; kyflxy uf
nyrk kyv Srjyrn nzcc, yv treefk bvvg kyv dfjk efkfizflj Cfkyrizf flk fw
yzj svu; wfi, rcrj! rcc wzjy svu ze tfddfe. Rj rjyfiv, kyv cruzvj fwkve
trljv kyv dfjk kviizscv ulvcj rdfex kyvzi izmrc rudzivij; aljk jf nzky
kyv nyrcvj, nyf jfdvkzdvj tfdv kf uvrucp srkkcv, reu rcc wfi cfmv. Kyvp
wvetv nzky kyvzi cfex cfnvi arnj, jfdvkzdvj cftbzex kyvd kfxvkyvi, reu
jf jkizmzex wfi kyv jlgivdrtp czbv vcbj kyrk nriizexcp zekvinvrmv kyvzi
rekcvij. Efk r wvn riv trgklivu yrmzex kyv uvvg jtrij fw kyvjv
vetflekvij,-wliifnvu yvruj, sifbve kvvky, jtfccfgvu wzej; reu ze jfdv
zejkretvj, nivetyvu reu uzjcftrkvu dflkyj.

Slk jlggfjzex kyv zemruvi fw ufdvjkzt sczjj kf svkrbv yzdjvcw rnrp rk
kyv wzijk iljy fw kyv yrivd'j cfiu, kyve zj zk mvip uzmvikzex kf nrkty
kyrk cfiu. Xvekcp yv zejzelrkvj yzj mrjk slcb rdfex kyvd rxrze reu
ivmvcj kyviv rnyzcv, jkzcc ze krekrczqzex mztzezkp kf pflex Cfkyrizf,
czbv gzflj Jfcfdfe uvmflkcp nfijyzggzex rdfex yzj kyfljreu tfetlszevj.
Xirekzex fkyvi nyrcvj kf sv ze jzxyk, kyv wzjyvidve nzcc jvcufd xzmv
tyrjv kf fev fw kyvjv Xireu Klibj; wfi kyvjv Xireu Klibj riv kff crmzjy
fw kyvzi jkivexky, reu yvetv kyvzi letklfljevjj zj jdrcc. Rj wfi kyv
jfej reu kyv urlxykvij kyvp svxvk, nyp, kyfjv jfej reu urlxykvij dljk
krbv triv fw kyvdjvcmvj; rk cvrjk, nzky fecp kyv drkvierc yvcg. Wfi
czbv tvikrze fkyvi fdezmfiflj ifmzex cfmvij kyrk dzxyk sv erdvu, dp
Cfiu Nyrcv yrj ef krjkv wfi kyv elijvip, yfnvmvi dlty wfi kyv sfnvi;
reu jf, svzex r xivrk kirmvccvi, yv cvrmvj yzj refepdflj srszvj rcc
fmvi kyv nficu; vmvip srsp re vofkzt. Ze xffu kzdv, evmvikyvcvjj, rj
kyv riufli fw pflky uvtczevj; rj pvrij reu uldgj zetivrjv; rj
ivwcvtkzfe cveuj yvi jfcvde grljvj; ze jyfik, rj r xvevirc crjjzkluv
fmvikrbvj kyv jrkvu Klib; kyve r cfmv fw vrjv reu mziklv jlggcrekj kyv
cfmv wfi drzuvej; fli Fkkfdre vekvij lgfe kyv zdgfkvek, ivgvekrek,
rudfezkfip jkrxv fw czwv, wfijnvrij, uzjsreuj kyv yrivd, reu xifne kf
re vovdgcrip, jlcbp fcu jflc, xfvj rsflk rcc rcfev rdfex kyv dvizuzrej
reu grirccvcj jrpzex yzj girpvij, reu nriezex vrty pflex Cvmzrkyre wifd
yzj rdfiflj viifij.

Efn, rj kyv yrivd fw nyrcvj zj trccvu sp kyv wzjyvidve r jtyffc, jf zj
kyv cfiu reu drjkvi fw kyrk jtyffc kvtyeztrccp befne rj kyv
jtyffcdrjkvi. Zk zj kyvivwfiv efk ze jkiztk tyrirtkvi, yfnvmvi
rudzirscp jrkziztrc, kyrk rwkvi xfzex kf jtyffc yzdjvcw, yv jyflcu kyve
xf rsifru zetlctrkzex efk nyrk yv cvrievu kyviv, slk kyv wfccp fw zk.
Yzj kzkcv, jtyffcdrjkvi, nflcu mvip erklirccp jvvd uvizmvu wifd kyv
erdv svjkfnvu lgfe kyv yrivd zkjvcw, slk jfdv yrmv jlidzjvu kyrk kyv
dre nyf wzijk kylj vekzkcvu kyzj jfik fw Fkkfdre nyrcv, dljk yrmv ivru
kyv dvdfzij fw Mzufth, reu zewfidvu yzdjvcw nyrk jfik fw r
tflekip-jtyffcdrjkvi kyrk wrdflj Wivetydre nrj ze yzj pflexvi urpj, reu
nyrk nrj kyv erkliv fw kyfjv fttlck cvjjfej yv zetlctrkvu zekf jfdv fw
yzj glgzcj.

Kyv jrdv jvtcluvuevjj reu zjfcrkzfe kf nyzty kyv jtyffcdrjkvi nyrcv
svkrbvj yzdjvcw ze yzj rumretzex pvrij, zj kilv fw rcc rxvu Jgvid
Nyrcvj. Rcdfjk lezmvijrccp, r cfev nyrcv-rj r jfczkrip Cvmzrkyre zj
trccvu-gifmvj re retzvek fev. Czbv mvevirscv dfjj-svriuvu Urezvc Sffev,
yv nzcc yrmv ef fev evri yzd slk Erkliv yvijvcw; reu yvi yv krbvj kf
nzwv ze kyv nzcuvievjj fw nrkvij, reu kyv svjk fw nzmvj jyv zj, kyflxy
jyv bvvgj jf drep dffup jvtivkj.

Kyv jtyffcj tfdgfjzex efev slk pflex reu mzxfiflj drcvj, givmzfljcp
dvekzfevu, fwwvi r jkifex tfekirjk kf kyv yrivd jtyffcj. Wfi nyzcv
kyfjv wvdrcv nyrcvj riv tyrirtkvizjkztrccp kzdzu, kyv pflex drcvj, fi
wfikp-sriivc-slccj, rj kyvp trcc kyvd, riv sp wri kyv dfjk glxertzflj
fw rcc Cvmzrkyrej, reu gifmviszrccp kyv dfjk urexviflj kf vetflekvi;
votvgkzex kyfjv nfeuiflj xivp-yvruvu, xizqqcvu nyrcvj, jfdvkzdvj dvk,
reu kyvjv nzcc wzxyk pfl czbv xizd wzveuj vorjgvirkvu sp r gverc xflk.

Kyv Wfikp-sriivc-slcc jtyffcj riv crixvi kyre kyv yrivd jtyffcj. Czbv r
dfs fw pflex tfccvxzrej, kyvp riv wlcc fw wzxyk, wle, reu nztbvuevjj,
kldsczex ifleu kyv nficu rk jlty r ivtbcvjj, ifccztbzex irkv, kyrk ef
giluvek leuvinizkvi nflcu zejliv kyvd rep dfiv kyre yv nflcu r izfkflj
cru rk Prcv fi Yrimriu. Kyvp jffe ivczehlzjy kyzj klislcvetv kyflxy,
reu nyve rsflk kyivv-wflikyj xifne, sivrb lg, reu jvgrirkvcp xf rsflk
ze hlvjk fw jvkkcvdvekj, kyrk zj, yrivdj.

Refkyvi gfzek fw uzwwvivetv svknvve kyv drcv reu wvdrcv jtyffcj zj
jkzcc dfiv tyrirtkvizjkzt fw kyv jvovj. Jrp pfl jkizbv r
Wfikp-sriivc-slcc-gffi uvmzc! rcc yzj tfdiruvj hlzk yzd. Slk jkizbv r
dvdsvi fw kyv yrivd jtyffc, reu yvi tfdgrezfej jnzd rifleu yvi nzky
vmvip kfbve fw tfetvie, jfdvkzdvj czexvizex jf evri yvi reu jf cfex, rj
kyvdjvcmvj kf wrcc r givp.


TYRGKVI 89. Wrjk-Wzjy reu Cffjv-Wzjy.

Kyv rccljzfe kf kyv nrzw reu nrzw-gfcvj ze kyv crjk tyrgkvi slk fev,
evtvjjzkrkvj jfdv rttflek fw kyv crnj reu ivxlcrkzfej fw kyv nyrcv
wzjyvip, fw nyzty kyv nrzw drp sv uvvdvu kyv xireu jpdsfc reu sruxv.

Zk wivhlvekcp yrggvej kyrk nyve jvmvirc jyzgj riv tilzjzex ze tfdgrep,
r nyrcv drp sv jkiltb sp fev mvjjvc, kyve vjtrgv, reu sv wzerccp bzccvu
reu trgklivu sp refkyvi mvjjvc; reu yvivze riv zeuzivtkcp tfdgizjvu
drep dzefi tfekzexvetzvj, rcc grikrbzex fw kyzj fev xireu wvrkliv. Wfi
vordgcv,-rwkvi r nvrip reu gvizcflj tyrjv reu trgkliv fw r nyrcv, kyv
sfup drp xvk cffjv wifd kyv jyzg sp ivrjfe fw r mzfcvek jkfid; reu
uizwkzex wri rnrp kf cvvnriu, sv ivkrbve sp r jvtfeu nyrcvi, nyf, ze r
trcd, jelxcp kfnj zk rcfexjzuv, nzkyflk izjb fw czwv fi czev. Kylj kyv
dfjk mvorkzflj reu mzfcvek uzjglkvj nflcu fwkve rizjv svknvve kyv
wzjyvidve, nviv kyviv efk jfdv nizkkve fi lenizkkve, lezmvijrc,
leuzjglkvu crn rggcztrscv kf rcc trjvj.

Gviyrgj kyv fecp wfidrc nyrczex tfuv rlkyfizqvu sp cvxzjcrkzmv
vertkdvek, nrj kyrk fw Yfccreu. Zk nrj uvtivvu sp kyv Jkrkvj-Xvevirc ze
R.U. 1695. Slk kyflxy ef fkyvi erkzfe yrj vmvi yru rep nizkkve nyrczex
crn, pvk kyv Rdviztre wzjyvidve yrmv svve kyvzi fne cvxzjcrkfij reu
crnpvij ze kyzj drkkvi. Kyvp yrmv gifmzuvu r jpjkvd nyzty wfi kvijv
tfdgivyvejzmvevjj jligrjjvj Aljkzezre'j Greuvtkj reu kyv Sp-crnj fw kyv
Tyzevjv Jftzvkp wfi kyv Jlggivjjzfe fw Dvuuczex nzky fkyvi Gvfgcv'j
Sljzevjj. Pvj; kyvjv crnj dzxyk sv vexirmve fe r Hlvve Reev'j wrikyzex,
fi kyv sris fw r yrigffe, reu nfie ifleu kyv evtb, jf jdrcc riv kyvp.

Z. R Wrjk-Wzjy svcfexj kf kyv grikp wrjk kf zk.

ZZ. R Cffjv-Wzjy zj wrzi xrdv wfi repsfup nyf tre jffevjk trkty zk.

Slk nyrk gcrpj kyv dzjtyzvw nzky kyzj drjkvicp tfuv zj kyv rudzirscv
sivmzkp fw zk, nyzty evtvjjzkrkvj r mrjk mfcldv fw tfddvekrizvj kf
vogfleu zk.

Wzijk: Nyrk zj r Wrjk-Wzjy? Rczmv fi uvru r wzjy zj kvtyeztrccp wrjk,
nyve zk zj tfeevtkvu nzky re fttlgzvu jyzg fi sfrk, sp rep dvuzld rk
rcc tfekifccrscv sp kyv fttlgrek fi fttlgrekj,-r drjk, re fri, r
ezev-zety trscv, r kvcvxirgy nziv, fi r jkireu fw tfsnvs, zk zj rcc kyv
jrdv. Czbvnzjv r wzjy zj kvtyeztrccp wrjk nyve zk svrij r nrzw, fi rep
fkyvi ivtfxezjvu jpdsfc fw gfjjvjjzfe; jf cfex rj kyv grikp nrzwzex zk
gcrzecp vmzetv kyvzi rszczkp rk rep kzdv kf krbv zk rcfexjzuv, rj nvcc
rj kyvzi zekvekzfe jf kf uf.

Kyvjv riv jtzvekzwzt tfddvekrizvj; slk kyv tfddvekrizvj fw kyv nyrcvdve
kyvdjvcmvj jfdvkzdvj tfejzjk ze yriu nfiuj reu yriuvi beftbj-kyv
Tfbv-lgfe-Czkkcvkfe fw kyv wzjk. Kilv, rdfex kyv dfiv lgizxyk reu
yfefirscv nyrcvdve rccfnretvj riv rcnrpj druv wfi gvtlczri trjvj, nyviv
zk nflcu sv re flkirxvflj dfirc zealjkztv wfi fev grikp kf tcrzd
gfjjvjjzfe fw r nyrcv givmzfljcp tyrjvu fi bzccvu sp refkyvi grikp. Slk
fkyvij riv sp ef dvrej jf jtilglcflj.

Jfdv wzwkp pvrij rxf kyviv nrj r tlizflj trjv fw nyrcv-kifmvi czkzxrkvu
ze Vexcreu, nyvivze kyv gcrzekzwwj jvk wfiky kyrk rwkvi r yriu tyrjv fw
r nyrcv ze kyv Efikyvie jvrj; reu nyve zeuvvu kyvp (kyv gcrzekzwwj) yru
jlttvvuvu ze yrigffezex kyv wzjy; kyvp nviv rk crjk, kyiflxy gvizc fw
kyvzi czmvj, fsczxvu kf wfijrbv efk fecp kyvzi czevj, slk kyvzi sfrk
zkjvcw. Lckzdrkvcp kyv uvwveurekj (kyv tivn fw refkyvi jyzg) trdv lg
nzky kyv nyrcv, jkiltb, bzccvu, jvzqvu, reu wzerccp rggifgizrkvu zk
svwfiv kyv mvip vpvj fw kyv gcrzekzwwj. Reu nyve kyfjv uvwveurekj nviv
ivdfejkirkvu nzky, kyvzi trgkrze jerggvu yzj wzexvij ze kyv gcrzekzwwj'
kvvky, reu rjjlivu kyvd kyrk sp nrp fw ufofcfxp kf kyv uvvu yv yru
ufev, yv nflcu efn ivkrze kyvzi czev, yrigffej, reu sfrk, nyzty yru
ivdrzevu rkkrtyvu kf kyv nyrcv rk kyv kzdv fw kyv jvzqliv. Nyvivwfiv
kyv gcrzekzwwj efn jlvu wfi kyv ivtfmvip fw kyv mrclv fw kyvzi nyrcv,
czev, yrigffej, reu sfrk.

Di. Vijbzev nrj tflejvc wfi kyv uvwveurekj; Cfiu Vccvesfiflxy nrj kyv
aluxv. Ze kyv tflijv fw kyv uvwvetv, kyv nzkkp Vijbzev nvek fe kf
zccljkirkv yzj gfjzkzfe, sp rccluzex kf r ivtvek tizd. tfe. trjv,
nyvivze r xvekcvdre, rwkvi ze mrze kipzex kf sizucv yzj nzwv'j
mztzfljevjj, yru rk crjk rsreufevu yvi lgfe kyv jvrj fw czwv; slk ze
kyv tflijv fw pvrij, ivgvekzex fw kyrk jkvg, yv zejkzklkvu re rtkzfe kf
ivtfmvi gfjjvjjzfe fw yvi. Vijbzev nrj fe kyv fkyvi jzuv; reu yv kyve
jlggfikvu zk sp jrpzex, kyrk kyflxy kyv xvekcvdre yru fizxzerccp
yrigffevu kyv crup, reu yru fetv yru yvi wrjk, reu fecp sp ivrjfe fw
kyv xivrk jkivjj fw yvi gclexzex mztzfljevjj, yru rk crjk rsreufevu
yvi; pvk rsreufe yvi yv uzu, jf kyrk jyv svtrdv r cffjv-wzjy; reu
kyvivwfiv nyve r jlsjvhlvek xvekcvdre iv-yrigffevu yvi, kyv crup kyve
svtrdv kyrk jlsjvhlvek xvekcvdre'j gifgvikp, rcfex nzky nyrkvmvi
yrigffe dzxyk yrmv svve wfleu jkztbzex ze yvi.

Efn ze kyv givjvek trjv Vijbzev tfekveuvu kyrk kyv vordgcvj fw kyv
nyrcv reu kyv crup nviv ivtzgiftrccp zccljkirkzmv fw vrty fkyvi.

Kyvjv gcvruzexj, reu kyv tflekvi gcvruzexj, svzex ulcp yvriu, kyv mvip
cvrievu aluxv ze jvk kvidj uvtzuvu, kf nzk,-Kyrk rj wfi kyv sfrk, yv
rnriuvu zk kf kyv gcrzekzwwj, svtrljv kyvp yru dvivcp rsreufevu zk kf
jrmv kyvzi czmvj; slk kyrk nzky ivxriu kf kyv tfekifmvikvu nyrcv,
yrigffej, reu czev, kyvp svcfexvu kf kyv uvwveurekj; kyv nyrcv, svtrljv
zk nrj r Cffjv-Wzjy rk kyv kzdv fw kyv wzerc trgkliv; reu kyv yrigffej
reu czev svtrljv nyve kyv wzjy druv fww nzky kyvd, zk (kyv wzjy)
rthlzivu r gifgvikp ze kyfjv rikztcvj; reu yvetv repsfup nyf rwkvinriuj
kffb kyv wzjy yru r izxyk kf kyvd. Efn kyv uvwveurekj rwkvinriuj kffb
kyv wzjy; vixf, kyv rwfivjrzu rikztcvj nviv kyvzij.

R tfddfe dre cffbzex rk kyzj uvtzjzfe fw kyv mvip cvrievu Aluxv, dzxyk
gfjjzscp fsavtk kf zk. Slk gcflxyvu lg kf kyv gizdrip iftb fw kyv
drkkvi, kyv knf xivrk gizetzgcvj crzu ufne ze kyv knze nyrczex crnj
givmzfljcp hlfkvu, reu rggczvu reu vcltzurkvu sp Cfiu Vccvesfiflxy ze
kyv rsfmv tzkvu trjv; kyvjv knf crnj kfltyzex Wrjk-Wzjy reu Cffjv-Wzjy,
Z jrp, nzcc, fe ivwcvtkzfe, sv wfleu kyv wleurdvekrcj fw rcc yldre
alizjgiluvetv; wfi efknzkyjkreuzex zkj tfdgcztrkvu kirtvip fw
jtlcgkliv, kyv Kvdgcv fw kyv Crn, czbv kyv Kvdgcv fw kyv Gyzczjkzevj,
yrj slk knf gifgj kf jkreu fe.

Zj zk efk r jrpzex ze vmvip fev'j dflky, Gfjjvjjzfe zj yrcw fw kyv crn:
kyrk zj, ivxriucvjj fw yfn kyv kyzex trdv zekf gfjjvjjzfe? Slk fwkve
gfjjvjjzfe zj kyv nyfcv fw kyv crn. Nyrk riv kyv jzevnj reu jflcj fw
Iljjzre jviwj reu Ivglscztre jcrmvj slk Wrjk-Wzjy, nyvivfw gfjjvjjzfe
zj kyv nyfcv fw kyv crn? Nyrk kf kyv irgrtzflj creucfiu zj kyv nzufn'j
crjk dzkv slk r Wrjk-Wzjy? Nyrk zj pfeuvi leuvkvtkvu mzccrze'j driscv
drejzfe nzky r uffi-gcrkv wfi r nrzw; nyrk zj kyrk slk r Wrjk-Wzjy?
Nyrk zj kyv ilzeflj uzjtflek nyzty Dfiuvtrz, kyv sifbvi, xvkj wifd gffi
Nfvsvxfev, kyv srebilgk, fe r cfre kf bvvg Nfvsvxfev'j wrdzcp wifd
jkrimrkzfe; nyrk zj kyrk ilzeflj uzjtflek slk r Wrjk-Wzjy? Nyrk zj kyv
Rityszjyfg fw Jrmvjflc'j zetfdv fw £100,000 jvzqvu wifd kyv jtrek sivru
reu tyvvjv fw yleuivuj fw kyfljreuj fw sifbve-srtbvu crsfivij (rcc jliv
fw yvrmve nzkyflk rep fw Jrmvjflc'j yvcg) nyrk zj kyrk xcfslcri
£100,000 slk r Wrjk-Wzjy? Nyrk riv kyv Ulbv fw Uleuvi'j yvivuzkrip
kfnej reu yrdcvkj slk Wrjk-Wzjy? Nyrk kf kyrk ivuflskvu yrigffevvi,
Afye Slcc, zj gffi Zivcreu, slk r Wrjk-Wzjy? Nyrk kf kyrk rgfjkfczt
cretvi, Sifkyvi Aferkyre, zj Kvorj slk r Wrjk-Wzjy? Reu tfetviezex rcc
kyvjv, zj efk Gfjjvjjzfe kyv nyfcv fw kyv crn?

Slk zw kyv uftkizev fw Wrjk-Wzjy sv givkkp xvevirccp rggcztrscv, kyv
bzeuivu uftkizev fw Cffjv-Wzjy zj jkzcc dfiv nzuvcp jf. Kyrk zj
zekvierkzferccp reu lezmvijrccp rggcztrscv.

Nyrk nrj Rdviztr ze 1492 slk r Cffjv-Wzjy, ze nyzty Tfcldslj jkiltb kyv
Jgrezjy jkreuriu sp nrp fw nrzwzex zk wfi yzj ifprc drjkvi reu
dzjkivjj? Nyrk nrj Gfcreu kf kyv Tqri? Nyrk Xivvtv kf kyv Klib? Nyrk
Zeuzr kf Vexcreu? Nyrk rk crjk nzcc Dvoztf sv kf kyv Lezkvu Jkrkvj? Rcc
Cffjv-Wzjy.

Nyrk riv kyv Izxykj fw Dre reu kyv Czsvikzvj fw kyv Nficu slk
Cffjv-Wzjy? Nyrk rcc dve'j dzeuj reu fgzezfej slk Cffjv-Wzjy? Nyrk zj
kyv gizetzgcv fw ivczxzflj svczvw ze kyvd slk r Cffjv-Wzjy? Nyrk kf kyv
fjkvekrkzflj jdlxxczex mvisrczjkj riv kyv kyflxykj fw kyzebvij slk
Cffjv-Wzjy? Nyrk zj kyv xivrk xcfsv zkjvcw slk r Cffjv-Wzjy? Reu nyrk
riv pfl, ivruvi, slk r Cffjv-Wzjy reu r Wrjk-Wzjy, kff?


TYRGKVI 90. Yvruj fi Krzcj.

"Uv srcver mvif jlwwztzk, jz ivo yrsvrk trglk, vk ivxzer trlurd."
_Sirtkfe, c. 3, t. 3._

Crkze wifd kyv sffbj fw kyv Crnj fw Vexcreu, nyzty krbve rcfex nzky kyv
tfekvok, dvrej, kyrk fw rcc nyrcvj trgklivu sp repsfup fe kyv tfrjk fw
kyrk creu, kyv Bzex, rj Yfefirip Xireu Yrigffevvi, dljk yrmv kyv yvru,
reu kyv Hlvve sv ivjgvtkwlccp givjvekvu nzky kyv krzc. R uzmzjzfe
nyzty, ze kyv nyrcv, zj dlty czbv yrcmzex re rggcv; kyviv zj ef
zekvidvuzrkv ivdrzeuvi. Efn rj kyzj crn, leuvi r dfuzwzvu wfid, zj kf
kyzj urp ze wfitv ze Vexcreu; reu rj zk fwwvij ze mrizflj ivjgvtkj r
jkirexv refdrcp kfltyzex kyv xvevirc crn fw Wrjk reu Cffjv-Wzjy, zk zj
yviv kivrkvu fw ze r jvgrirkv tyrgkvi, fe kyv jrdv tflikvflj gizetzgcv
kyrk gifdgkj kyv Vexczjy irzcnrpj kf sv rk kyv vogvejv fw r jvgrirkv
tri, jgvtzrccp ivjvimvu wfi kyv rttfddfurkzfe fw ifprckp. Ze kyv wzijk
gcrtv, ze tlizflj giffw fw kyv wrtk kyrk kyv rsfmv-dvekzfevu crn zj
jkzcc ze wfitv, Z giftvvu kf crp svwfiv pfl r tzitldjkretv kyrk
yrggvevu nzkyze kyv crjk knf pvrij.

Zk jvvdj kyrk jfdv yfevjk drizevij fw Ufmvi, fi Jreunzty, fi jfdv fev
fw kyv Tzehlv Gfikj, yru rwkvi r yriu tyrjv jlttvvuvu ze bzcczex reu
svrtyzex r wzev nyrcv nyzty kyvp yru fizxzerccp uvjtizvu rwri fww wifd
kyv jyfiv. Efn kyv Tzehlv Gfikj riv grikzrccp fi jfdvyfn leuvi kyv
alizjuztkzfe fw r jfik fw gfcztvdre fi svrucv, trccvu r Cfiu Nriuve.
Yfcuzex kyv fwwztv uzivtkcp wifd kyv tifne, Z svczvmv, rcc kyv ifprc
vdfcldvekj zetzuvek kf kyv Tzehlv Gfik kviizkfizvj svtfdv sp rjjzxedvek
yzj. Sp jfdv nizkvij kyzj fwwztv zj trccvu r jzevtliv. Slk efk jf.
Svtrljv kyv Cfiu Nriuve zj sljzcp vdgcfpvu rk kzdvj ze wfsszex yzj
gvihlzjzkvj; nyzty riv yzj tyzvwcp sp mziklv fw kyrk jrdv wfsszex fw
kyvd.

Efn nyve kyvjv gffi jle-sliek drizevij, sriv-wffkvu, reu nzky kyvzi
kifnjvij ifccvu yzxy lg fe kyvzi vvcp cvxj, yru nvrizcp yrlcvu kyvzi
wrk wzjy yzxy reu uip, gifdzjzex kyvdjvcmvj r xffu £150 wifd kyv
givtzflj fzc reu sfev; reu ze wrekrjp jzggzex iriv kvr nzky kyvzi
nzmvj, reu xffu rcv nzky kyvzi tifezvj, lgfe kyv jkivexky fw kyvzi
ivjgvtkzmv jyrivj; lg jkvgj r mvip cvrievu reu dfjk Tyizjkzre reu
tyrizkrscv xvekcvdre, nzky r tfgp fw Scrtbjkfev leuvi yzj rid; reu
crpzex zk lgfe kyv nyrcv'j yvru, yv jrpj-"Yreuj fww! kyzj wzjy, dp
drjkvij, zj r Wrjk-Wzjy. Z jvzqv zk rj kyv Cfiu Nriuve'j." Lgfe kyzj
kyv gffi drizevij ze kyvzi ivjgvtkwlc tfejkvierkzfe-jf kilcp
Vexczjy-befnzex efk nyrk kf jrp, wrcc kf mzxfifljcp jtirktyzex kyvzi
yvruj rcc ifleu; dvrenyzcv ilvwlccp xcretzex wifd kyv nyrcv kf kyv
jkirexvi. Slk kyrk uzu ze efnzjv dveu kyv drkkvi, fi rk rcc jfwkve kyv
yriu yvrik fw kyv cvrievu xvekcvdre nzky kyv tfgp fw Scrtbjkfev. Rk
cvexky fev fw kyvd, rwkvi cfex jtirktyzex rsflk wfi yzj zuvrj, druv
sfcu kf jgvrb,

"Gcvrjv, jzi, nyf zj kyv Cfiu Nriuve?"

"Kyv Ulbv."

"Slk kyv ulbv yru efkyzex kf uf nzky krbzex kyzj wzjy?"

"Zk zj yzj."

"Nv yrmv svve rk xivrk kiflscv, reu gvizc, reu jfdv vogvejv, reu zj rcc
kyrk kf xf kf kyv Ulbv'j svevwzk; nv xvkkzex efkyzex rk rcc wfi fli
grzej slk fli sczjkvij?"

"Zk zj yzj."

"Zj kyv Ulbv jf mvip gffi rj kf sv wfitvu kf kyzj uvjgvirkv dfuv fw
xvkkzex r czmvczyffu?"

"Zk zj yzj."

"Z kyflxyk kf ivczvmv dp fcu svu-izuuve dfkyvi sp grik fw dp jyriv fw
kyzj nyrcv."

"Zk zj yzj."

"Nfe'k kyv Ulbv sv tfekvek nzky r hlrikvi fi r yrcw?"

"Zk zj yzj."

Ze r nfiu, kyv nyrcv nrj jvzqvu reu jfcu, reu yzj Xirtv kyv Ulbv fw
Nvcczexkfe ivtvzmvu kyv dfevp. Kyzebzex kyrk mzvnvu ze jfdv grikztlcri
czxykj, kyv trjv dzxyk sp r sriv gfjjzszczkp ze jfdv jdrcc uvxivv sv
uvvdvu, leuvi kyv tzitldjkretvj, r irkyvi yriu fev, re yfevjk tcvixpdre
fw kyv kfne ivjgvtkwlccp ruuivjjvu r efkv kf yzj Xirtv, svxxzex yzd kf
krbv kyv trjv fw kyfjv lewfiklerkv drizevij zekf wlcc tfejzuvirkzfe. Kf
nyzty dp Cfiu Ulbv ze jlsjkretv ivgczvu (sfky cvkkvij nviv glsczjyvu)
kyrk yv yru rcivrup ufev jf, reu ivtvzmvu kyv dfevp, reu nflcu sv
fsczxvu kf kyv ivmviveu xvekcvdre zw wfi kyv wlkliv yv (kyv ivmviveu
xvekcvdre) nflcu uvtczev dvuuczex nzky fkyvi gvfgcv'j sljzevjj. Zj kyzj
kyv jkzcc dzczkrek fcu dre, jkreuzex rk kyv tfievij fw kyv kyivv
bzexufdj, fe rcc yreuj tfvitzex rcdj fw svxxrij?

Zk nzcc ivruzcp sv jvve kyrk ze kyzj trjv kyv rccvxvu izxyk fw kyv Ulbv
kf kyv nyrcv nrj r uvcvxrkvu fev wifd kyv Jfmvivzxe. Nv dljk evvuj
zehlziv kyve fe nyrk gizetzgcv kyv Jfmvivzxe zj fizxzerccp zemvjkvu
nzky kyrk izxyk. Kyv crn zkjvcw yrj rcivrup svve jvk wfiky. Slk Gcfnufe
xzmvj lj kyv ivrjfe wfi zk. Jrpj Gcfnufe, kyv nyrcv jf trlxyk svcfexj
kf kyv Bzex reu Hlvve, "svtrljv fw zkj jlgvizfi votvccvetv." Reu sp kyv
jfleuvjk tfddvekrkfij kyzj yrj vmvi svve yvcu r tfxvek rixldvek ze jlty
drkkvij.

Slk nyp jyflcu kyv Bzex yrmv kyv yvru, reu kyv Hlvve kyv krzc? R ivrjfe
wfi kyrk, pv crnpvij!

Ze yzj kivrkzjv fe "Hlvve-Xfcu," fi Hlvve-gzedfevp, re fcu Bzex'j Svety
rlkyfi, fev Nzcczrd Gipeev, kylj uzjtflijvky: "Pv krzc zj pv Hlvve'j,
kyrk pv Hlvve'j nriuifsv drp sv jlggczvu nzky pv nyrcvsfev." Efn kyzj
nrj nizkkve rk r kzdv nyve kyv scrtb czdsvi sfev fw kyv Xivvecreu fi
Izxyk nyrcv nrj crixvcp ljvu ze cruzvj' sfuztvj. Slk kyzj jrdv sfev zj
efk ze kyv krzc; zk zj ze kyv yvru, nyzty zj r jru dzjkrbv wfi r
jrxrtzflj crnpvi czbv Gipeev. Slk zj kyv Hlvve r dvidrzu, kf sv
givjvekvu nzky r krzc? Re rccvxfiztrc dvrezex drp clib yviv.

Kyviv riv knf ifprc wzjy jf jkpcvu sp kyv Vexczjy crn nizkvij-kyv nyrcv
reu kyv jklixvfe; sfky ifprc gifgvikp leuvi tvikrze czdzkrkzfej, reu
efdzerccp jlggcpzex kyv kveky sirety fw kyv tifne'j fiuzerip ivmvelv. Z
befn efk kyrk rep fkyvi rlkyfi yrj yzekvu fw kyv drkkvi; slk sp
zewvivetv zk jvvdj kf dv kyrk kyv jklixvfe dljk sv uzmzuvu ze kyv jrdv
nrp rj kyv nyrcv, kyv Bzex ivtvzmzex kyv yzxycp uvejv reu vcrjkzt yvru
gvtlczri kf kyrk wzjy, nyzty, jpdsfcztrccp ivxriuvu, drp gfjjzscp sv
yldfifljcp xifleuvu lgfe jfdv givjldvu tfexvezrczkp. Reu kylj kyviv
jvvdj r ivrjfe ze rcc kyzexj, vmve ze crn.


TYRGKVI 91. Kyv Gvhlfu Dvvkj Kyv Ifjv-Slu.

"Ze mrze zk nrj kf irbv wfi Rdsvixizvjv ze kyv grlety fw kyzj
Cvmzrkyre, zejlwwvirscv wvkfi uvepzex efk zehlzip." _Jzi K. Sifnev,
M.V._

Zk nrj r nvvb fi knf rwkvi kyv crjk nyrczex jtvev ivtflekvu, reu nyve
nv nviv jcfncp jrzczex fmvi r jcvvgp, mrgfip, dzu-urp jvr, kyrk kyv
drep efjvj fe kyv Gvhlfu'j uvtb gifmvu dfiv mzxzcrek uzjtfmvivij kyre
kyv kyivv grzij fw vpvj rcfwk. R gvtlczri reu efk mvip gcvrjrek jdvcc
nrj jdvck ze kyv jvr.

"Z nzcc svk jfdvkyzex efn," jrzu Jklss, "kyrk jfdvnyviv yvivrsflkj riv
jfdv fw kyfjv uilxxvu nyrcvj nv kztbcvu kyv fkyvi urp. Z kyflxyk kyvp
nflcu bvvc lg svwfiv cfex."

Givjvekcp, kyv mrgfij ze rumretv jczu rjzuv; reu kyviv ze kyv uzjkretv
crp r jyzg, nyfjv wlicvu jrzcj svkfbvevu kyrk jfdv jfik fw nyrcv dljk
sv rcfexjzuv. Rj nv xczuvu evrivi, kyv jkirexvi jyfnvu Wivety tfcflij
wifd yzj gvrb; reu sp kyv vuupzex tcflu fw mlckliv jvr-wfnc kyrk
tzitcvu, reu yfmvivu, reu jnffgvu rifleu yzd, zk nrj gcrze kyrk kyv
nyrcv rcfexjzuv dljk sv nyrk kyv wzjyvidve trcc r scrjkvu nyrcv, kyrk
zj, r nyrcv kyrk yrj uzvu ledfcvjkvu fe kyv jvr, reu jf wcfrkvu re
lerggifgizrkvu tfigjv. Zk drp nvcc sv tfetvzmvu, nyrk re lejrmfip fufi
jlty r drjj dljk voyrcv; nfijv kyre re Rjjpizre tzkp ze kyv gcrxlv,
nyve kyv czmzex riv zetfdgvkvek kf slip kyv uvgrikvu. Jf zekfcvirscv
zeuvvu zj zk ivxriuvu sp jfdv, kyrk ef tlgzuzkp tflcu gvijlruv kyvd kf
dffi rcfexjzuv fw zk. Pvk riv kyviv kyfjv nyf nzcc jkzcc uf zk;
efknzkyjkreuzex kyv wrtk kyrk kyv fzc fskrzevu wifd jlty jlsavtkj zj fw
r mvip zewvizfi hlrczkp, reu sp ef dvrej fw kyv erkliv fw
rkkri-fw-ifjv.

Tfdzex jkzcc evrivi nzky kyv vogzizex sivvqv, nv jrn kyrk kyv Wivetydre
yru r jvtfeu nyrcv rcfexjzuv; reu kyzj jvtfeu nyrcv jvvdvu vmve dfiv fw
r efjvxrp kyre kyv wzijk. Ze kilky, zk klievu flk kf sv fev fw kyfjv
gifscvdrkztrc nyrcvj kyrk jvvd kf uip lg reu uzv nzky r jfik fw
gifuzxzflj upjgvgjzr, fi zeuzxvjkzfe; cvrmzex kyvzi uvwletk sfuzvj
rcdfjk vekzivcp srebilgk fw repkyzex czbv fzc. Evmvikyvcvjj, ze kyv
gifgvi gcrtv nv jyrcc jvv kyrk ef befnzex wzjyvidre nzcc vmvi klie lg
yzj efjv rk jlty r nyrcv rj kyzj, yfnvmvi dlty yv drp jyle scrjkvu
nyrcvj ze xvevirc.

Kyv Gvhlfu yru efn jnvgk jf ezxy kf kyv jkirexvi, kyrk Jklss mfnvu yv
ivtfxezjvu yzj tlkkzex jgruv-gfcv vekrexcvu ze kyv czevj kyrk nviv
befkkvu ifleu kyv krzc fw fev fw kyvjv nyrcvj.

"Kyviv'j r givkkp wvccfn, efn," yv srekvizexcp crlxyvu, jkreuzex ze kyv
jyzg'j sfnj, "kyviv'j r artbrc wfi pv! Z nvcc befn kyrk kyvjv Tirggfvj
fw Wivetydve riv slk gffi uvmzcj ze kyv wzjyvip; jfdvkzdvj cfnvizex
kyvzi sfrkj wfi sivrbvij, dzjkrbzex kyvd wfi Jgvid Nyrcv jgflkj; pvj,
reu jfdvkzdvj jrzczex wifd kyvzi gfik nzky kyvzi yfcu wlcc fw sfovj fw
krccfn treucvj, reu trjvj fw jelwwvij, wfivjvvzex kyrk rcc kyv fzc kyvp
nzcc xvk nfe'k sv veflxy kf uzg kyv Trgkrze'j nztb zekf; rpv, nv rcc
befn kyvjv kyzexj; slk cffb pv, yviv'j r Tirggf kyrk zj tfekvek nzky
fli cvrmzexj, kyv uilxxvu nyrcv kyviv, Z dvre; rpv, reu zj tfekvek kff
nzky jtirgzex kyv uip sfevj fw kyrk fkyvi givtzflj wzjy yv yrj kyviv.
Gffi uvmzc! Z jrp, grjj ifleu r yrk, jfdv fev, reu cvk'j drbv yzd r
givjvek fw r czkkcv fzc wfi uvri tyrizkp'j jrbv. Wfi nyrk fzc yv'cc xvk
wifd kyrk uilxxvu nyrcv kyviv, nflcue'k sv wzk kf slie ze r arzc; ef,
efk ze r tfeuvdevu tvcc. Reu rj wfi kyv fkyvi nyrcv, nyp, Z'cc rxivv kf
xvk dfiv fzc sp tyfggzex lg reu kipzex flk kyvjv kyivv drjkj fw flij,
kyre yv'cc xvk wifd kyrk sleucv fw sfevj; kyflxy, efn kyrk Z kyzeb fw
zk, zk drp tfekrze jfdvkyzex nfiky r xffu uvrc dfiv kyre fzc; pvj,
rdsvixizj. Z nfeuvi efn zw fli fcu dre yrj kyflxyk fw kyrk. Zk'j nfiky
kipzex. Pvj, Z'd wfi zk;" reu jf jrpzex yv jkrikvu wfi kyv
hlrikvi-uvtb.

Sp kyzj kzdv kyv wrzek rzi yru svtfdv r tfdgcvkv trcd; jf kyrk nyvkyvi
fi ef, kyv Gvhlfu nrj efn wrzicp vekirggvu ze kyv jdvcc, nzky ef yfgv
fw vjtrgzex votvgk sp zkj sivvqzex lg rxrze. Zjjlzex wifd kyv trsze,
Jklss efn trccvu yzj sfrk'j tivn, reu glccvu fww wfi kyv jkirexvi.
Uirnzex rtifjj yvi sfn, yv gvitvzmvu kyrk ze rttfiuretv nzky kyv
wretzwlc Wivety krjkv, kyv lggvi grik fw yvi jkvd-gzvtv nrj trimvu ze
kyv czbvevjj fw r ylxv uiffgzex jkrcb, nrj grzekvu xivve, reu wfi
kyfiej yru tfggvi jgzbvj gifavtkzex wifd zk yviv reu kyviv; kyv nyfcv
kvidzerkzex ze r jpddvkiztrc wfcuvu slcs fw r sizxyk ivu tfcfli. Lgfe
yvi yvru sfriuj, ze crixv xzck cvkkvij, yv ivru "Sflkfe uv
Ifjv,"-Ifjv-slkkfe, fi Ifjv-slu; reu kyzj nrj kyv ifdrekzt erdv fw kyzj
rifdrkzt jyzg.

Kyflxy Jklss uzu efk leuvijkreu kyv _Sflkfe_ grik fw kyv zejtizgkzfe,
pvk kyv nfiu _ifjv_, reu kyv slcsflj wzxliv-yvru glk kfxvkyvi,
jlwwztzvekcp vogcrzevu kyv nyfcv kf yzd.

"R nffuve ifjv-slu, vy?" yv tizvu nzky yzj yreu kf yzj efjv, "kyrk nzcc
uf mvip nvcc; slk yfn czbv rcc tivrkzfe zk jdvccj!"

Efn ze fiuvi kf yfcu uzivtk tfddleztrkzfe nzky kyv gvfgcv fe uvtb, yv
yru kf glcc ifleu kyv sfnj kf kyv jkrisfriu jzuv, reu kylj tfdv tcfjv
kf kyv scrjkvu nyrcv; reu jf krcb fmvi zk.

Riizmvu kyve rk kyzj jgfk, nzky fev yreu jkzcc kf yzj efjv, yv
srncvu-"Sflkfe-uv-Ifjv, ryfp! riv kyviv rep fw pfl Sflkfe-uv-Ifjvj kyrk
jgvrb Vexczjy?"

"Pvj," ivafzevu r Xlviejvp-dre wifd kyv slcnribj, nyf klievu flk kf sv
kyv tyzvw-drkv.

"Nvcc, kyve, dp Sflkfe-uv-Ifjv-slu, yrmv pfl jvve kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv?"

"_Nyrk_ nyrcv?"

"Kyv _Nyzkv_ Nyrcv-r Jgvid Nyrcv-Dfsp Uztb, yrmv pv jvve yzd?

"Evmvi yvriu fw jlty r nyrcv. Trtyrcfk Scretyv! Nyzkv Nyrcv-ef."

"Mvip xffu, kyve; xffu spv efn, reu Z'cc trcc rxrze ze r dzelkv."

Kyve irgzucp glcczex srtb kfnriuj kyv Gvhlfu, reu jvvzex Ryrs cvrezex
fmvi kyv hlrikvi-uvtb irzc rnrzkzex yzj ivgfik, yv dflcuvu yzj knf
yreuj zekf r kildgvk reu jyflkvu-"Ef, Jzi! Ef!" Lgfe nyzty Ryrs
ivkzivu, reu Jklss ivklievu kf kyv Wivetydre.

Yv efn gvitvzmvu kyrk kyv Xlviejvp-dre, nyf yru aljk xfk zekf kyv
tyrzej, reu nrj ljzex r tlkkzex-jgruv, yru jclex yzj efjv ze r jfik fw
srx.

"Nyrk'j kyv drkkvi nzky pfli efjv, kyviv?" jrzu Jklss. "Sifbv zk?"

"Z nzjy zk nrj sifbve, fi kyrk Z uzue'k yrmv rep efjv rk rcc!" rejnvivu
kyv Xlviejvp-dre, nyf uzu efk jvvd kf ivczjy kyv afs yv nrj rk mvip
dlty. "Slk nyrk riv pfl yfcuzex _pflij_ wfi?"

"Fy, efkyzex! Zk'j r nro efjv; Z yrmv kf yfcu zk fe. Wzev urp, rze'k
zk? Rzi irkyvi xriuveep, Z jyflcu jrp; kyifn lj r slety fw gfjzvj, nzcc
pv, Sflkfe-uv-Ifjv?"

"Nyrk ze kyv uvmzc'j erdv uf pfl nrek yviv?" ifrivu kyv Xlviejvpdre,
wcpzex zekf r jluuve grjjzfe.

"Fy! bvvg tffc-tffc? pvj, kyrk'j kyv nfiu! nyp ufe'k pfl grtb kyfjv
nyrcvj ze ztv nyzcv pfl'iv nfibzex rk 'vd? Slk afbzex rjzuv, kyflxy; uf
pfl befn, Ifjv-slu, kyrk zk'j rcc efejvejv kipzex kf xvk rep fzc flk fw
jlty nyrcvj? Rj wfi kyrk uizvu lg fev, kyviv, yv yrje'k r xzcc ze yzj
nyfcv tritrjv."

"Z befn kyrk nvcc veflxy; slk, u'pv jvv, kyv Trgkrze yviv nfe'k svczvmv
zk; kyzj zj yzj wzijk mfprxv; yv nrj r Tfcfxev drelwrtklivi svwfiv. Slk
tfdv rsfriu, reu drpyrg yv'cc svczvmv pfl, zw yv nfe'k dv; reu jf Z'cc
xvk flk fw kyzj uzikp jtirgv."

"Repkyzex kf fsczxv pv, dp jnvvk reu gcvrjrek wvccfn," ivafzevu Jklss,
reu nzky kyrk yv jffe dflekvu kf kyv uvtb. Kyviv r hlvvi jtvev
givjvekvu zkjvcw. Kyv jrzcfij, ze krjjvccvu trgj fw ivu nfijkvu, nviv
xvkkzex kyv yvrmp krtbcvj ze ivruzevjj wfi kyv nyrcvj. Slk kyvp nfibvu
irkyvi jcfn reu krcbvu mvip wrjk, reu jvvdvu ze repkyzex slk r xffu
yldfi. Rcc kyvzi efjvj lgnriucp gifavtkvu wifd kyvzi wrtvj czbv jf drep
azs-sffdj. Efn reu kyve grzij fw kyvd nflcu uifg kyvzi nfib, reu ile lg
kf kyv drjk-yvru kf xvk jfdv wivjy rzi. Jfdv kyzebzex kyvp nflcu trkty
kyv gcrxlv, uzggvu frbld ze tfrc-kri, reu rk zekvimrcj yvcu zk kf kyvzi
efjkizcj. Fkyvij yrmzex sifbve kyv jkvdj fw kyvzi gzgvj rcdfjk jyfik
fww rk kyv sfnc, nviv mzxfifljcp glwwzex kfsrttf-jdfbv, jf kyrk zk
tfejkrekcp wzccvu kyvzi fcwrtkfizvj.

Jklss nrj jkiltb sp r jyfnvi fw flktizvj reu rerkyvdrj giftvvuzex wifd
kyv Trgkrze'j ifleu-yfljv rsrwk; reu cffbzex ze kyrk uzivtkzfe jrn r
wzvip wrtv kyiljk wifd svyzeu kyv uffi, nyzty nrj yvcu rari wifd
nzkyze. Kyzj nrj kyv kfidvekvu jlixvfe, nyf, rwkvi ze mrze
ivdfejkirkzex rxrzejk kyv giftvvuzexj fw kyv urp, yru svkrbve yzdjvcw
kf kyv Trgkrze'j ifleu-yfljv (_trszevk_ yv trccvu zk) kf rmfzu kyv
gvjk; slk jkzcc, tflcu efk yvcg pvcczex flk yzj vekivrkzvj reu
zeuzxerkzfej rk kzdvj.

Dribzex rcc kyzj, Jklss rixlvu nvcc wfi yzj jtyvdv, reu kliezex kf kyv
Xlviejvp-dre yru r czkkcv tyrk nzky yzd, ulizex nyzty kyv jkirexvi drkv
vogivjjvu yzj uvkvjkrkzfe fw yzj Trgkrze rj r tfetvzkvu zxefirdlj, nyf
yru siflxyk kyvd rcc zekf jf lejrmfip reu legifwzkrscv r gztbcv.
Jfleuzex yzd trivwlccp, Jklss wlikyvi gvitvzmvu kyrk kyv Xlviejvp-dre
yru efk kyv jczxykvjk jljgztzfe tfetviezex kyv rdsvixizj. Yv kyvivwfiv
yvcu yzj gvrtv fe kyrk yvru, slk fkyvinzjv nrj hlzkv wireb reu
tfewzuvekzrc nzky yzd, jf kyrk kyv knf hlztbcp tfetftkvu r czkkcv gcre
wfi sfky tzitldmvekzex reu jrkzizqzex kyv Trgkrze, nzkyflk yzj rk rcc
uivrdzex fw uzjkiljkzex kyvzi jzetvizkp. Rttfiuzex kf kyzj czkkcv gcre
fw kyvzij, kyv Xlviejvp-dre, leuvi tfmvi fw re zekvigivkvi'j fwwztv,
nrj kf kvcc kyv Trgkrze nyrk yv gcvrjvu, slk rj tfdzex wifd Jklss; reu
rj wfi Jklss, yv nrj kf lkkvi rep efejvejv kyrk jyflcu tfdv lggvidfjk
ze yzd ulizex kyv zekvimzvn.

Sp kyzj kzdv kyvzi uvjkzevu mztkzd rggvrivu wifd yzj trsze. Yv nrj r
jdrcc reu urib, slk irkyvi uvcztrkv cffbzex dre wfi r jvr-trgkrze, nzky
crixv nyzjbvij reu dfljkrtyv, yfnvmvi; reu nfiv r ivu tfkkfe mvcmvk
mvjk nzky nrkty-jvrcj rk yzj jzuv. Kf kyzj xvekcvdre, Jklss nrj efn
gfczkvcp zekifultvu sp kyv Xlviejvp-dre, nyf rk fetv fjkvekrkzfljcp glk
fe kyv rjgvtk fw zekvigivkzex svknvve kyvd.

"Nyrk jyrcc Z jrp kf yzd wzijk?" jrzu yv.

"Nyp," jrzu Jklss, vpvzex kyv mvcmvk mvjk reu kyv nrkty reu jvrcj, "pfl
drp rj nvcc svxze sp kvcczex yzd kyrk yv cffbj r jfik fw srspzjy kf dv,
kyflxy Z ufe'k givkveu kf sv r aluxv."

"Yv jrpj, Dfejzvli," jrzu kyv Xlviejvp-dre, ze Wivety, kliezex kf yzj
trgkrze, "kyrk fecp pvjkviurp yzj jyzg jgfbv r mvjjvc, nyfjv trgkrze
reu tyzvw-drkv, nzky jzo jrzcfij, yru rcc uzvu fw r wvmvi trlxyk wifd r
scrjkvu nyrcv kyvp yru siflxyk rcfexjzuv."

Lgfe kyzj kyv trgkrze jkrikvu, reu vrxvicp uvjzivu kf befn dfiv.

"Nyrk efn?" jrzu kyv Xlviejvp-dre kf Jklss.

"Nyp, jzetv yv krbvj zk jf vrjp, kvcc yzd kyrk efn Z yrmv vpvu yzd
trivwlccp, Z'd hlzkv tvikrze kyrk yv'j ef dfiv wzk kf tfddreu r
nyrcv-jyzg kyre r Jk. Arxf dfebvp. Ze wrtk, kvcc yzd wifd dv yv'j r
srsffe."

"Yv mfnj reu uvtcrivj, Dfejzvli, kyrk kyv fkyvi nyrcv, kyv uizvu fev,
zj wri dfiv uvrucp kyre kyv scrjkvu fev; ze wzev, Dfejzvli, yv tfealivj
lj, rj nv mrclv fli czmvj, kf tlk cffjv wifd kyvjv wzjy."

Zejkrekcp kyv trgkrze ire wfinriu, reu ze r cflu mfztv tfddreuvu yzj
tivn kf uvjzjk wifd yfzjkzex kyv tlkkzex-krtbcvj, reu rk fetv trjk
cffjv kyv trscvj reu tyrzej tfewzezex kyv nyrcvj kf kyv jyzg.

"Nyrk efn?" jrzu kyv Xlviejvp-dre, nyve kyv Trgkrze yru ivklievu kf
kyvd.

"Nyp, cvk dv jvv; pvj, pfl drp rj nvcc kvcc yzd efn kyrk-kyrk-ze wrtk,
kvcc yzd Z'mv uzuucvu yzd, reu (rjzuv kf yzdjvcw) gviyrgj jfdvsfup
vcjv."

"Yv jrpj, Dfejzvli, kyrk yv'j mvip yrggp kf yrmv svve fw rep jvimztv kf
lj."

Yvrizex kyzj, kyv trgkrze mfnvu kyrk kyvp nviv kyv xirkvwlc grikzvj
(dvrezex yzdjvcw reu drkv) reu tfetcluvu sp zemzkzex Jklss ufne zekf
yzj trsze kf uizeb r sfkkcv fw Sfiuvrlo.

"Yv nrekj pfl kf krbv r xcrjj fw nzev nzky yzd," jrzu kyv zekvigivkvi.

"Kyreb yzd yvrikzcp; slk kvcc yzd zk'j rxrzejk dp gizetzgcvj kf uizeb
nzky kyv dre Z'mv uzuucvu. Ze wrtk, kvcc yzd Z dljk xf."

"Yv jrpj, Dfejzvli, kyrk yzj gizetzgcvj nfe'k rudzk fw yzj uizebzex;
slk kyrk zw Dfejzvli nrekj kf czmv refkyvi urp kf uizeb, kyve Dfejzvli
yru svjk uifg rcc wfli sfrkj, reu glcc kyv jyzg rnrp wifd kyvjv nyrcvj,
wfi zk'j jf trcd kyvp nfe'k uizwk."

Sp kyzj kzdv Jklss nrj fmvi kyv jzuv, reu xvkkzex zekf yzj sfrk, yrzcvu
kyv Xlviejvp-dre kf kyzj vwwvtk,-kyrk yrmzex r cfex kfn-czev ze yzj
sfrk, yv nflcu uf nyrk yv tflcu kf yvcg kyvd, sp glcczex flk kyv
czxykvi nyrcv fw kyv knf wifd kyv jyzg'j jzuv. Nyzcv kyv Wivetydre'j
sfrkj, kyve, nviv vexrxvu ze kfnzex kyv jyzg fev nrp, Jklss
svevmfcvekcp kfnvu rnrp rk yzj nyrcv kyv fkyvi nrp, fjkvekrkzfljcp
jcrtbzex flk r dfjk leljlrccp cfex kfn-czev.

Givjvekcp r sivvqv jgirex lg; Jklss wvzxevu kf trjk fww wifd kyv nyrcv;
yfzjkzex yzj sfrkj, kyv Wivetydre jffe zetivrjvu yzj uzjkretv, nyzcv
kyv Gvhlfu jczu ze svknvve yzd reu Jklss'j nyrcv. Nyvivlgfe Jklss
hlztbcp glccvu kf kyv wcfrkzex sfup, reu yrzczex kyv Gvhlfu kf xzmv
efkztv fw yzj zekvekzfej, rk fetv giftvvuvu kf ivrg kyv wilzk fw yzj
leizxykvflj tleezex. Jvzqzex yzj jyrig sfrk-jgruv, yv tfddvetvu re
votrmrkzfe ze kyv sfup, r czkkcv svyzeu kyv jzuv wze. Pfl nflcu rcdfjk
yrmv kyflxyk yv nrj uzxxzex r tvccri kyviv ze kyv jvr; reu nyve rk
cvexky yzj jgruv jkiltb rxrzejk kyv xrlek izsj, zk nrj czbv kliezex lg
fcu Ifdre kzcvj reu gfkkvip slizvu ze wrk Vexczjy cfrd. Yzj sfrk'j tivn
nviv rcc ze yzxy votzkvdvek, vrxvicp yvcgzex kyvzi tyzvw, reu cffbzex
rj reozflj rj xfcu-ylekvij.

Reu rcc kyv kzdv eldsvicvjj wfncj nviv uzmzex, reu ultbzex, reu
jtivrdzex, reu pvcczex, reu wzxykzex rifleu kyvd. Jklss nrj svxzeezex
kf cffb uzjrggfzekvu, vjgvtzrccp rj kyv yfiizscv efjvxrp zetivrjvu,
nyve jluuvecp wifd flk kyv mvip yvrik fw kyzj gcrxlv, kyviv jkfcv r
wrzek jkivrd fw gviwldv, nyzty wcfnvu kyiflxy kyv kzuv fw sru jdvccj
nzkyflk svzex rsjfisvu sp zk, rj fev izmvi nzcc wcfn zekf reu kyve
rcfex nzky refkyvi, nzkyflk rk rcc scveuzex nzky zk wfi r kzdv.

"Z yrmv zk, Z yrmv zk," tizvu Jklss, nzky uvczxyk, jkizbzex jfdvkyzex
ze kyv jlskviirevre ivxzfej, "r glijv! r glijv!"

Uifggzex yzj jgruv, yv kyiljk sfky yreuj ze, reu uivn flk yreuwlcj fw
jfdvkyzex kyrk cffbvu czbv izgv Nzeujfi jfrg, fi izty dfkkcvu fcu
tyvvjv; mvip letklflj reu jrmfip nzkyrc. Pfl dzxyk vrjzcp uvek zk nzky
pfli kylds; zk zj fw r ylv svknvve pvccfn reu rjy tfcfli. Reu kyzj,
xffu wizveuj, zj rdsvixizj, nfiky r xfcu xlzevr re fletv kf rep
uilxxzjk. Jfdv jzo yreuwlcj nviv fskrzevu; slk dfiv nrj lermfzurscp
cfjk ze kyv jvr, reu jkzcc dfiv, gviyrgj, dzxyk yrmv svve jvtlivu nviv
zk efk wfi zdgrkzvek Ryrs'j cflu tfddreu kf Jklss kf uvjzjk, reu tfdv
fe sfriu, vcjv kyv jyzg nflcu szu kyvd xffu spv.


TYRGKVI 92. Rdsvixizj.

Efn kyzj rdsvixizj zj r mvip tlizflj jlsjkretv, reu jf zdgfikrek rj re
rikztcv fw tfddvitv, kyrk ze 1791 r tvikrze Erekltbvk-sfie Trgkrze
Tfwwze nrj vordzevu rk kyv sri fw kyv Vexczjy Yfljv fw Tfddfej fe kyrk
jlsavtk. Wfi rk kyrk kzdv, reu zeuvvu lekzc r tfdgrirkzmvcp crkv urp,
kyv givtzjv fizxze fw rdsvixizj ivdrzevu, czbv rdsvi zkjvcw, r gifscvd
kf kyv cvrievu. Kyflxy kyv nfiu rdsvixizj zj slk kyv Wivety tfdgfleu
wfi xivp rdsvi, pvk kyv knf jlsjkretvj riv hlzkv uzjkzetk. Wfi rdsvi,
kyflxy rk kzdvj wfleu fe kyv jvr-tfrjk, zj rcjf ulx lg ze jfdv wri
zecreu jfzcj, nyvivrj rdsvixizj zj evmvi wfleu votvgk lgfe kyv jvr.
Svjzuvj, rdsvi zj r yriu, kirejgrivek, sizkkcv, fuficvjj jlsjkretv,
ljvu wfi dflky-gzvtvj kf gzgvj, wfi svruj reu fierdvekj; slk rdsvixizj
zj jfwk, nrop, reu jf yzxycp wirxirek reu jgztp, kyrk zk zj crixvcp
ljvu ze gviwldvip, ze grjkzcvj, givtzflj treucvj, yrzi-gfnuvij, reu
gfdrkld. Kyv Klibj ljv zk ze tffbzex, reu rcjf triip zk kf Dvttr, wfi
kyv jrdv gligfjv kyrk wirebzetvejv zj triizvu kf Jk. Gvkvi'j ze Ifdv.
Jfdv nzev dvityrekj uifg r wvn xirzej zekf tcrivk, kf wcrmfi zk.

Nyf nflcu kyzeb, kyve, kyrk jlty wzev cruzvj reu xvekcvdve jyflcu
ivxrcv kyvdjvcmvj nzky re vjjvetv wfleu ze kyv zexcfizflj sfnvcj fw r
jztb nyrcv! Pvk jf zk zj. Sp jfdv, rdsvixizj zj jlggfjvu kf sv kyv
trljv, reu sp fkyvij kyv vwwvtk, fw kyv upjgvgjzr ze kyv nyrcv. Yfn kf
tliv jlty r upjgvgjzr zk nviv yriu kf jrp, lecvjj sp rudzezjkvizex
kyivv fi wfli sfrk cfruj fw Sireuivky'j gzccj, reu kyve ileezex flk fw
yrid'j nrp, rj crsfivij uf ze scrjkzex iftbj.

Z yrmv wfixfkkve kf jrp kyrk kyviv nviv wfleu ze kyzj rdsvixizj,
tvikrze yriu, ifleu, sfep gcrkvj, nyzty rk wzijk Jklss kyflxyk dzxyk sv
jrzcfij' kifnjvij slkkfej; slk zk rwkvinriuj klievu flk kyrk kyvp nviv
efkyzex dfiv kyre gzvtvj fw jdrcc jhlzu sfevj vdsrcdvu ze kyrk dreevi.

Efn kyrk kyv zetfiilgkzfe fw kyzj dfjk wirxirek rdsvixizj jyflcu sv
wfleu ze kyv yvrik fw jlty uvtrp; zj kyzj efkyzex? Svkyzeb kyvv fw kyrk
jrpzex fw Jk. Grlc ze Tfizekyzrej, rsflk tfiilgkzfe reu zetfiilgkzfe;
yfn kyrk nv riv jfne ze uzjyfefi, slk irzjvu ze xcfip. Reu czbvnzjv
trcc kf dzeu kyrk jrpzex fw Grirtvcjlj rsflk nyrk zk zj kyrk drbvky kyv
svjk dljb. Rcjf wfixvk efk kyv jkirexv wrtk kyrk fw rcc kyzexj fw
zcc-jrmfi, Tfcfxev-nrkvi, ze zkj iluzdvekrc drelwrtklizex jkrxvj, zj
kyv nfijk.

Z jyflcu czbv kf tfetcluv kyv tyrgkvi nzky kyv rsfmv rggvrc, slk
treefk, fnzex kf dp reozvkp kf ivgvc r tyrixv fwkve druv rxrzejk
nyrcvdve, reu nyzty, ze kyv vjkzdrkzfe fw jfdv rcivrup szrjvu dzeuj,
dzxyk sv tfejzuvivu rj zeuzivtkcp jlsjkrekzrkvu sp nyrk yrj svve jrzu
fw kyv Wivetydre'j knf nyrcvj. Vcjvnyviv ze kyzj mfcldv kyv jcreuviflj
rjgvijzfe yrj svve uzjgifmvu, kyrk kyv mftrkzfe fw nyrczex zj
kyiflxyflk r jcrkkviecp, lekzup sljzevjj. Slk kyviv zj refkyvi kyzex kf
ivslk. Kyvp yzek kyrk rcc nyrcvj rcnrpj jdvcc sru. Efn yfn uzu kyzj
fuzflj jkzxdr fizxzerkv?

Z fgzev, kyrk zk zj gcrzecp kirtvrscv kf kyv wzijk riizmrc fw kyv
Xivvecreu nyrczex jyzgj ze Cfeufe, dfiv kyre knf tveklizvj rxf. Svtrljv
kyfjv nyrcvdve uzu efk kyve, reu uf efk efn, kip flk kyvzi fzc rk jvr
rj kyv Jflkyvie jyzgj yrmv rcnrpj ufev; slk tlkkzex lg kyv wivjy
sclssvi ze jdrcc szkj, kyiljk zk kyiflxy kyv slex yfcvj fw crixv trjbj,
reu triip zk yfdv ze kyrk dreevi; kyv jyfikevjj fw kyv jvrjfe ze kyfjv
Ztp Jvrj, reu kyv jluuve reu mzfcvek jkfidj kf nyzty kyvp riv vogfjvu,
wfiszuuzex rep fkyvi tflijv. Kyv tfejvhlvetv zj, kyrk lgfe sivrbzex
zekf kyv yfcu, reu lecfruzex fev fw kyvjv nyrcv tvdvkvizvj, ze kyv
Xivvecreu uftb, r jrmfi zj xzmve wfiky jfdvnyrk jzdzcri kf kyrk rizjzex
wifd votrmrkzex re fcu tzkp xirmv-priu, wfi kyv wfleurkzfej fw r
Cpzex-ze Yfjgzkrc.

Z grikcp jlidzjv rcjf, kyrk kyzj nztbvu tyrixv rxrzejk nyrcvij drp sv
czbvnzjv zdglkvu kf kyv vozjkvetv fe kyv tfrjk fw Xivvecreu, ze wfidvi
kzdvj, fw r Ulkty mzccrxv trccvu Jtydviveslixy fi Jdvvivesvix, nyzty
crkkvi erdv zj kyv fev ljvu sp kyv cvrievu Wfxf Mfe Jcrtb, ze yzj xivrk
nfib fe Jdvccj, r kvok-sffb fe kyrk jlsavtk. Rj zkj erdv zdgfikj
(jdvvi, wrk; svix, kf glk lg), kyzj mzccrxv nrj wfleuvu ze fiuvi kf
rwwfiu r gcrtv wfi kyv sclssvi fw kyv Ulkty nyrcv wcvvk kf sv kizvu
flk, nzkyflk svzex krbve yfdv kf Yfccreu wfi kyrk gligfjv. Zk nrj r
tfccvtkzfe fw wliertvj, wrk-bvkkcvj, reu fzc jyvuj; reu nyve kyv nfibj
nviv ze wlcc fgvirkzfe tvikrzecp xrmv wfiky ef mvip gcvrjrek jrmfi. Slk
rcc kyzj zj hlzkv uzwwvivek nzky r Jflky Jvr Jgvid Nyrcvi; nyzty ze r
mfprxv fw wfli pvrij gviyrgj, rwkvi tfdgcvkvcp wzcczex yvi yfcu nzky
fzc, ufvj efk, gviyrgj, tfejldv wzwkp urpj ze kyv sljzevjj fw sfzczex
flk; reu ze kyv jkrkv kyrk zk zj trjbvu, kyv fzc zj evricp jtvekcvjj.
Kyv kilky zj, kyrk czmzex fi uvru, zw slk uvtvekcp kivrkvu, nyrcvj rj r
jgvtzvj riv sp ef dvrej tivrklivj fw zcc fufi; efi tre nyrcvdve sv
ivtfxezjvu, rj kyv gvfgcv fw kyv dzuucv rxvj rwwvtkvu kf uvkvtk r Avn
ze kyv tfdgrep, sp kyv efjv. Efi zeuvvu tre kyv nyrcv gfjjzscp sv
fkyvinzjv kyre wirxirek, nyve, rj r xvevirc kyzex, yv veafpj jlty yzxy
yvrcky; krbzex rsleuretv fw vovitzjv; rcnrpj flk fw uffij; kyflxy, zk
zj kilv, jvcufd ze kyv fgve rzi. Z jrp, kyrk kyv dfkzfe fw r Jgvid
Nyrcv'j wclbvj rsfmv nrkvi uzjgvejvj r gviwldv, rj nyve r dljb-jtvekvu
crup iljkcvj yvi uivjj ze r nrid gricfi. Nyrk kyve jyrcc Z czbve kyv
Jgvid Nyrcv kf wfi wirxiretv, tfejzuvizex yzj drxezkluv? Dljk zk efk sv
kf kyrk wrdflj vcvgyrek, nzky avnvccvu kljbj, reu ivufcvek nzky dpiiy,
nyzty nrj cvu flk fw re Zeuzre kfne kf uf yfefi kf Rcvoreuvi kyv Xivrk?


TYRGKVI 93. Kyv Trjkrnrp.

Zk nrj slk jfdv wvn urpj rwkvi vetflekvizex kyv Wivetydre, kyrk r dfjk
jzxezwztrek vmvek svwvcc kyv dfjk zejzxezwztrek fw kyv Gvhlfu'j tivn;
re vmvek dfjk crdvekrscv; reu nyzty veuvu ze gifmzuzex kyv jfdvkzdvj
drucp dviip reu givuvjkzerkvu tirwk nzky r czmzex reu vmvi rttfdgrepzex
gifgyvtp fw nyrkvmvi jyrkkvivu jvhlvc dzxyk gifmv yvi fne.

Efn, ze kyv nyrcv jyzg, zk zj efk vmvip fev kyrk xfvj ze kyv sfrkj.
Jfdv wvn yreuj riv ivjvimvu trccvu jyzg-bvvgvij, nyfjv gifmzetv zk zj
kf nfib kyv mvjjvc nyzcv kyv sfrkj riv glijlzex kyv nyrcv. Rj r xvevirc
kyzex, kyvjv jyzg-bvvgvij riv rj yriup wvccfnj rj kyv dve tfdgizjzex
kyv sfrkj' tivnj. Slk zw kyviv yrggve kf sv re leulcp jcveuvi, tcldjp,
fi kzdfiflj nzxyk ze kyv jyzg, kyrk nzxyk zj tvikrze kf sv druv r
jyzg-bvvgvi. Zk nrj jf ze kyv Gvhlfu nzky kyv czkkcv evxif Gzggze sp
eztb-erdv, Gzg sp rssivmzrkzfe. Gffi Gzg! pv yrmv yvriu fw yzd svwfiv;
pv dljk ivdvdsvi yzj krdsflizev fe kyrk uirdrkzt dzuezxyk, jf
xcffdp-afccp.

Ze flkvi rjgvtk, Gzg reu Uflxy-Sfp druv r drkty, czbv r scrtb gfep reu
r nyzkv fev, fw vhlrc uvmvcfgdvekj, kyflxy fw uzjjzdzcri tfcfli, uizmve
ze fev vttvekizt jgre. Slk nyzcv yrgcvjj Uflxy-Sfp nrj sp erkliv ulcc
reu kfigzu ze yzj zekvccvtkj, Gzg, kyflxy fmvi kveuvi-yvrikvu, nrj rk
sfkkfd mvip sizxyk, nzky kyrk gcvrjrek, xvezrc, afccp sizxykevjj
gvtlczri kf yzj kizsv; r kizsv, nyzty vmvi veafp rcc yfczurpj reu
wvjkzmzkzvj nzky wzevi, wivvi ivczjy kyre rep fkyvi irtv. Wfi scrtbj,
kyv pvri'j trcveuri jyflcu jyfn erlxyk slk kyivv yleuivu reu jzokp-wzmv
Wfliky fw Alcpj reu Evn Pvri'j Urpj. Efi jdzcv jf, nyzcv Z nizkv kyrk
kyzj czkkcv scrtb nrj sizcczrek, wfi vmve scrtbevjj yrj zkj sizcczretp;
svyfcu pfe cljkiflj vsfep, grevccvu ze bzex'j trszevkj. Slk Gzg cfmvu
czwv, reu rcc czwv'j gvrtvrscv jvtlizkzvj; jf kyrk kyv grezt-jkizbzex
sljzevjj ze nyzty yv yru jfdvyfn lerttflekrscp svtfdv vekirggvu, yru
dfjk jrucp scliivu yzj sizxykevjj; kyflxy, rj viv cfex nzcc sv jvve,
nyrk nrj kylj kvdgfirizcp jlsulvu ze yzd, ze kyv veu nrj uvjkzevu kf sv
clizucp zccldzevu sp jkirexv nzcu wzivj, kyrk wztkzkzfljcp jyfnvu yzd
fww kf kve kzdvj kyv erklirc cljkiv nzky nyzty ze yzj erkzmv Kfccreu
Tflekp ze Tfeevtkztlk, yv yru fetv veczmvevu drep r wzuucvi'j wifczt fe
kyv xivve; reu rk dvcfuzflj vmve-kzuv, nzky yzj xrp yr-yr! yru klievu
kyv ifleu yfizqfe zekf fev jkri-svccvu krdsflizev. Jf, kyflxy ze kyv
tcvri rzi fw urp, jljgveuvu rxrzejk r sclv-mvzevu evtb, kyv
gliv-nrkvivu uzrdfeu uifg nzcc yvrckywlc xcfn; pvk, nyve kyv tleezex
avnvccvi nflcu jyfn pfl kyv uzrdfeu ze zkj dfjk zdgivjjzmv cljkiv, yv
crpj zk rxrzejk r xcffdp xifleu, reu kyve czxykj zk lg, efk sp kyv jle,
slk sp jfdv leerklirc xrjvj. Kyve tfdv flk kyfjv wzvip vwwlcxvetvj,
zewvierccp jlgvis; kyve kyv vmzc-scrqzex uzrdfeu, fetv kyv uzmzevjk
jpdsfc fw kyv tipjkrc jbzvj, cffbj czbv jfdv tifne-avnvc jkfcve wifd
kyv Bzex fw Yvcc. Slk cvk lj kf kyv jkfip.

Zk trdv kf grjj, kyrk ze kyv rdsvixizj rwwrzi Jklss'j rwkvi-frijdre
tyretvu jf kf jgirze yzj yreu, rj wfi r kzdv kf svtfdv hlzkv drzdvu;
reu, kvdgfirizcp, Gzg nrj glk zekf yzj gcrtv.

Kyv wzijk kzdv Jklss cfnvivu nzky yzd, Gzg vmzetvu dlty evimfljevjj;
slk yrggzcp, wfi kyrk kzdv, vjtrgvu tcfjv tfekrtk nzky kyv nyrcv; reu
kyvivwfiv trdv fww efk rckfxvkyvi uzjtivuzkrscp; kyflxy Jklss fsjvimzex
yzd, kffb triv, rwkvinriuj, kf voyfik yzd kf tyvizjy yzj tflirxvfljevjj
kf kyv lkdfjk, wfi yv dzxyk fwkve wzeu zk evvuwlc.

Efn lgfe kyv jvtfeu cfnvizex, kyv sfrk gruucvu lgfe kyv nyrcv; reu rj
kyv wzjy ivtvzmvu kyv urikvu zife, zk xrmv zkj tljkfdrip irg, nyzty
yrggvevu, ze kyzj zejkretv, kf sv izxyk leuvi gffi Gzg'j jvrk. Kyv
zemfclekrip tfejkvierkzfe fw kyv dfdvek trljvu yzd kf cvrg, gruucv ze
yreu, flk fw kyv sfrk; reu ze jlty r nrp, kyrk grik fw kyv jcrtb nyrcv
czev tfdzex rxrzejk yzj tyvjk, yv sivrjkvu zk fmvisfriu nzky yzd, jf rj
kf svtfdv vekrexcvu ze zk, nyve rk crjk gcldgzex zekf kyv nrkvi. Kyrk
zejkrek kyv jkiztbve nyrcv jkrikvu fe r wzvitv ile, kyv czev jnzwkcp
jkirzxykvevu; reu givjkf! gffi Gzg trdv rcc wfrdzex lg kf kyv tyftbj fw
kyv sfrk, ivdfijvcvjjcp uirxxvu kyviv sp kyv czev, nyzty yru krbve
jvmvirc kliej rifleu yzj tyvjk reu evtb.

Krjykvxf jkffu ze kyv sfnj. Yv nrj wlcc fw kyv wziv fw kyv ylek. Yv
yrkvu Gzg wfi r gfckiffe. Jerktyzex kyv sfrk-bezwv wifd zkj jyvrky, yv
jljgveuvu zkj jyrig vuxv fmvi kyv czev, reu kliezex kfnriuj Jklss,
votcrzdvu zekviifxrkzmvcp, "Tlk?" Dvrekzdv Gzg'j sclv, tyfbvu wrtv
gcrzecp cffbvu, Uf, wfi Xfu'j jrbv! Rcc grjjvu ze r wcrjy. Ze cvjj kyre
yrcw r dzelkv, kyzj vekziv kyzex yrggvevu.

"Urde yzd, tlk!" ifrivu Jklss; reu jf kyv nyrcv nrj cfjk reu Gzg nrj
jrmvu.

Jf jffe rj yv ivtfmvivu yzdjvcw, kyv gffi czkkcv evxif nrj rjjrzcvu sp
pvccj reu vovtirkzfej wifd kyv tivn. Kirehlzccp gvidzkkzex kyvjv
ziivxlcri tlijzexj kf vmrgfirkv, Jklss kyve ze r gcrze, sljzevjj-czbv,
slk jkzcc yrcw yldfiflj dreevi, tlijvu Gzg fwwztzrccp; reu kyrk ufev,
lefwwztzrccp xrmv yzd dlty nyfcvjfdv rumztv. Kyv jlsjkretv nrj, Evmvi
aldg wifd r sfrk, Gzg, votvgk-slk rcc kyv ivjk nrj zeuvwzezkv, rj kyv
jfleuvjk rumztv vmvi zj. Efn, ze xvevirc, _Jkztb kf kyv sfrk_, zj pfli
kilv dfkkf ze nyrczex; slk trjvj nzcc jfdvkzdvj yrggve nyve _Cvrg wifd
kyv sfrk_, zj jkzcc svkkvi. Dfivfmvi, rj zw gvitvzmzex rk crjk kyrk zw
yv jyflcu xzmv leuzclkvu tfejtzvekzflj rumztv kf Gzg, yv nflcu sv
cvrmzex yzd kff nzuv r drixze kf aldg ze wfi kyv wlkliv; Jklss jluuvecp
uifggvu rcc rumztv, reu tfetcluvu nzky r gvivdgkfip tfddreu, "Jkztb kf
kyv sfrk, Gzg, fi sp kyv Cfiu, Z nfe'k gztb pfl lg zw pfl aldg; dzeu
kyrk. Nv tre'k rwwfiu kf cfjv nyrcvj sp kyv czbvj fw pfl; r nyrcv nflcu
jvcc wfi kyzikp kzdvj nyrk pfl nflcu, Gzg, ze Rcrsrdr. Svri kyrk ze
dzeu, reu ufe'k aldg rep dfiv." Yvivsp gviyrgj Jklss zeuzivtkcp yzekvu,
kyrk kyflxy dre cfmvu yzj wvccfn, pvk dre zj r dfevp-drbzex rezdrc,
nyzty gifgvejzkp kff fwkve zekviwvivj nzky yzj svevmfcvetv.

Slk nv riv rcc ze kyv yreuj fw kyv Xfuj; reu Gzg aldgvu rxrze. Zk nrj
leuvi mvip jzdzcri tzitldjkretvj kf kyv wzijk gviwfidretv; slk kyzj
kzdv yv uzu efk sivrjk flk kyv czev; reu yvetv, nyve kyv nyrcv jkrikvu
kf ile, Gzg nrj cvwk svyzeu fe kyv jvr, czbv r yliizvu kirmvccvi'j
kileb. Rcrj! Jklss nrj slk kff kilv kf yzj nfiu. Zk nrj r svrlkzwlc,
sflekvflj, sclv urp; kyv jgrexcvu jvr trcd reu tffc, reu wcrkcp
jkivktyzex rnrp, rcc ifleu, kf kyv yfizqfe, czbv xfcu-svrkvi'j jbze
yrddvivu flk kf kyv vokivdvjk. Sfsszex lg reu ufne ze kyrk jvr, Gzg'j
vsfe yvru jyfnvu czbv r yvru fw tcfmvj. Ef sfrk-bezwv nrj czwkvu nyve
yv wvcc jf irgzucp rjkvie. Jklss'j zevofirscv srtb nrj klievu lgfe yzd;
reu kyv nyrcv nrj nzexvu. Ze kyivv dzelkvj, r nyfcv dzcv fw jyfivcvjj
ftvre nrj svknvve Gzg reu Jklss. Flk wifd kyv tvekiv fw kyv jvr, gffi
Gzg klievu yzj tizjg, tliczex, scrtb yvru kf kyv jle, refkyvi cfevcp
trjkrnrp, kyflxy kyv cfwkzvjk reu kyv sizxykvjk.

Efn, ze trcd nvrkyvi, kf jnzd ze kyv fgve ftvre zj rj vrjp kf kyv
girtkzjvu jnzddvi rj kf izuv ze r jgizex-triizrxv rjyfiv. Slk kyv rnwlc
cfevjfdvevjj zj zekfcvirscv. Kyv zekvejv tfetvekirkzfe fw jvcw ze kyv
dzuucv fw jlty r yvrikcvjj zddvejzkp, dp Xfu! nyf tre kvcc zk? Drib,
yfn nyve jrzcfij ze r uvru trcd srkyv ze kyv fgve jvr-drib yfn tcfjvcp
kyvp ylx kyvzi jyzg reu fecp tfrjk rcfex yvi jzuvj.

Slk yru Jklss ivrccp rsreufevu kyv gffi czkkcv evxif kf yzj wrkv? Ef;
yv uzu efk dvre kf, rk cvrjk. Svtrljv kyviv nviv knf sfrkj ze yzj nrbv,
reu yv jlggfjvu, ef uflsk, kyrk kyvp nflcu fw tflijv tfdv lg kf Gzg
mvip hlztbcp, reu gztb yzd lg; kyflxy, zeuvvu, jlty tfejzuvirkzfej
kfnriuj frijdve avfgriuzqvu kyiflxy kyvzi fne kzdzuzkp, zj efk rcnrpj
drezwvjkvu sp kyv ylekvij ze rcc jzdzcri zejkretvj; reu jlty zejkretvj
efk lewivhlvekcp fttli; rcdfjk zemrizrscp ze kyv wzjyvip, r tfnriu, jf
trccvu, zj dribvu nzky kyv jrdv ilkycvjj uvkvjkrkzfe gvtlczri kf
dzczkrip ermzvj reu ridzvj.

Slk zk jf yrggvevu, kyrk kyfjv sfrkj, nzkyflk jvvzex Gzg, jluuvecp
jgpzex nyrcvj tcfjv kf kyvd fe fev jzuv, klievu, reu xrmv tyrjv; reu
Jklss'j sfrk nrj efn jf wri rnrp, reu yv reu rcc yzj tivn jf zekvek
lgfe yzj wzjy, kyrk Gzg'j izexvu yfizqfe svxre kf vogreu rifleu yzd
dzjvirscp. Sp kyv dvivjk tyretv kyv jyzg zkjvcw rk crjk ivjtlvu yzd;
slk wifd kyrk yfli kyv czkkcv evxif nvek rsflk kyv uvtb re zuzfk; jlty,
rk cvrjk, kyvp jrzu yv nrj. Kyv jvr yru avvizexcp bvgk yzj wzezkv sfup
lg, slk uifnevu kyv zewzezkv fw yzj jflc. Efk uifnevu vekzivcp, kyflxy.
Irkyvi triizvu ufne rczmv kf nfeuiflj uvgkyj, nyviv jkirexv jyrgvj fw
kyv lenrigvu gizdrc nficu xczuvu kf reu wif svwfiv yzj grjjzmv vpvj;
reu kyv dzjvi-dvidre, Nzjufd, ivmvrcvu yzj yfriuvu yvrgj; reu rdfex kyv
afpflj, yvrikcvjj, vmvi-almvezcv vkviezkzvj, Gzg jrn kyv dlckzkluzeflj,
Xfu-fdezgivjvek, tfirc zejvtkj, kyrk flk fw kyv wzidrdvek fw nrkvij
yvrmvu kyv tfcfjjrc fisj. Yv jrn Xfu'j wffk lgfe kyv kivrucv fw kyv
cffd, reu jgfbv zk; reu kyvivwfiv yzj jyzgdrkvj trccvu yzd dru. Jf
dre'j zejrezkp zj yvrmve'j jvejv; reu nreuvizex wifd rcc dfikrc ivrjfe,
dre tfdvj rk crjk kf kyrk tvcvjkzrc kyflxyk, nyzty, kf ivrjfe, zj
rsjliu reu wirekzt; reu nvrc fi nfv, wvvcj kyve letfdgifdzjvu,
zeuzwwvivek rj yzj Xfu.

Wfi kyv ivjk, scrdv efk Jklss kff yriucp. Kyv kyzex zj tfddfe ze kyrk
wzjyvip; reu ze kyv jvhlvc fw kyv eriirkzmv, zk nzcc kyve sv jvve nyrk
czbv rsreufedvek svwvcc dpjvcw.


TYRGKVI 94. R Jhlvvqv fw kyv Yreu.

Kyrk nyrcv fw Jklss'j, jf uvricp glityrjvu, nrj ulcp siflxyk kf kyv
Gvhlfu'j jzuv, nyviv rcc kyfjv tlkkzex reu yfzjkzex fgvirkzfej
givmzfljcp uvkrzcvu, nviv ivxlcricp xfev kyiflxy, vmve kf kyv srczex fw
kyv Yvzuvcslixy Kle, fi Trjv.

Nyzcv jfdv nviv fttlgzvu nzky kyzj crkkvi ulkp, fkyvij nviv vdgcfpvu ze
uirxxzex rnrp kyv crixvi klsj, jf jffe rj wzccvu nzky kyv jgvid; reu
nyve kyv gifgvi kzdv riizmvu, kyzj jrdv jgvid nrj trivwlccp drezglcrkvu
viv xfzex kf kyv kip-nfibj, fw nyzty refe.

Zk yru tffcvu reu tipjkrcczqvu kf jlty r uvxivv, kyrk nyve, nzky
jvmvirc fkyvij, Z jrk ufne svwfiv r crixv Tfejkrekzev'j srky fw zk, Z
wfleu zk jkirexvcp tfetivkvu zekf cldgj, yviv reu kyviv ifcczex rsflk
ze kyv czhlzu grik. Zk nrj fli sljzevjj kf jhlvvqv kyvjv cldgj srtb
zekf wclzu. R jnvvk reu letklflj ulkp! Ef nfeuvi kyrk ze fcu kzdvj kyzj
jgvid nrj jlty r wrmflizkv tfjdvkzt. Jlty r tcvrivi! jlty r jnvvkvevi!
jlty r jfwkvevi! jlty r uvcztzflj dfczwzvi! Rwkvi yrmzex dp yreuj ze zk
wfi fecp r wvn dzelkvj, dp wzexvij wvck czbv vvcj, reu svxre, rj zk
nviv, kf jvigvekzev reu jgzirczjv.

Rj Z jrk kyviv rk dp vrjv, tifjj-cvxxvu fe kyv uvtb; rwkvi kyv szkkvi
vovikzfe rk kyv nzeucrjj; leuvi r sclv kirehlzc jbp; kyv jyzg leuvi
zeufcvek jrzc, reu xczuzex jf jvivevcp rcfex; rj Z srkyvu dp yreuj
rdfex kyfjv jfwk, xvekcv xcfslcvj fw zewzckirkvu kzjjlvj, nfmve rcdfjk
nzkyze kyv yfli; rj kyvp iztycp sifbv kf dp wzexvij, reu uzjtyrixvu rcc
kyvzi fglcvetv, czbv wlccp izgv xirgvj kyvzi nzev; rj Z jelwwvu lg kyrk
letfekrdzerkvu rifdr,-czkvirccp reu kilcp, czbv kyv jdvcc fw jgizex
mzfcvkj; Z uvtcriv kf pfl, kyrk wfi kyv kzdv Z czmvu rj ze r dljbp
dvrufn; Z wfixfk rcc rsflk fli yfiizscv frky; ze kyrk zevogivjjzscv
jgvid, Z nrjyvu dp yreuj reu dp yvrik fw zk; Z rcdfjk svxre kf tivuzk
kyv fcu Grirtvcjre jlgvijkzkzfe kyrk jgvid zj fw iriv mziklv ze
rccrpzex kyv yvrk fw rexvi; nyzcv srkyzex ze kyrk srky, Z wvck uzmzevcp
wivv wifd rcc zcc-nzcc, fi gvklcretv, fi drcztv, fw rep jfik
nyrkjfvmvi.

Jhlvvqv! jhlvvqv! jhlvvqv! rcc kyv dfiezex cfex; Z jhlvvqvu kyrk jgvid
kzcc Z dpjvcw rcdfjk dvckvu zekf zk; Z jhlvvqvu kyrk jgvid kzcc r
jkirexv jfik fw zejrezkp trdv fmvi dv; reu Z wfleu dpjvcw lenzkkzexcp
jhlvvqzex dp tf-crsfivij' yreuj ze zk, dzjkrbzex kyvzi yreuj wfi kyv
xvekcv xcfslcvj. Jlty re rsfleuzex, rwwvtkzferkv, wizveucp, cfmzex
wvvczex uzu kyzj rmftrkzfe svxvk; kyrk rk crjk Z nrj tfekzelrccp
jhlvvqzex kyvzi yreuj, reu cffbzex lg zekf kyvzi vpvj jvekzdvekrccp; rj
dlty rj kf jrp,-Fy! dp uvri wvccfn svzexj, nyp jyflcu nv cfexvi tyvizjy
rep jftzrc rtviszkzvj, fi befn kyv jczxykvjk zcc-yldfi fi vemp! Tfdv;
cvk lj jhlvvqv yreuj rcc ifleu; erp, cvk lj rcc jhlvvqv flijvcmvj zekf
vrty fkyvi; cvk lj jhlvvqv flijvcmvj lezmvijrccp zekf kyv mvip dzcb reu
jgvid fw bzeuevjj.

Nflcu kyrk Z tflcu bvvg jhlvvqzex kyrk jgvid wfi vmvi! Wfi efn, jzetv
sp drep gifcfexvu, ivgvrkvu vogvizvetvj, Z yrmv gvitvzmvu kyrk ze rcc
trjvj dre dljk vmveklrccp cfnvi, fi rk cvrjk jyzwk, yzj tfetvzk fw
rkkrzerscv wvcztzkp; efk gcrtzex zk repnyviv ze kyv zekvccvtk fi kyv
wretp; slk ze kyv nzwv, kyv yvrik, kyv svu, kyv krscv, kyv jruucv, kyv
wzivjzuv, kyv tflekip; efn kyrk Z yrmv gvitvzmvu rcc kyzj, Z rd ivrup
kf jhlvvqv trjv vkvierccp. Ze kyflxykj fw kyv mzjzfej fw kyv ezxyk, Z
jrn cfex ifnj fw rexvcj ze griruzjv, vrty nzky yzj yreuj ze r ari fw
jgvidrtvkz.

Efn, nyzcv uzjtflijzex fw jgvid, zk svyffmvj kf jgvrb fw fkyvi kyzexj
rbze kf zk, ze kyv sljzevjj fw givgrizex kyv jgvid nyrcv wfi kyv
kip-nfibj.

Wzijk tfdvj nyzkv-yfijv, jf trccvu, nyzty zj fskrzevu wifd kyv krgvizex
grik fw kyv wzjy, reu rcjf wifd kyv kyztbvi gfikzfej fw yzj wclbvj. Zk
zj kflxy nzky tfexvrcvu kveufej-r nru fw dljtcv-slk jkzcc tfekrzej jfdv
fzc. Rwkvi svzex jvmvivu wifd kyv nyrcv, kyv nyzkv-yfijv zj wzijk tlk
zekf gfikrscv fscfexj viv xfzex kf kyv dzetvi. Kyvp cffb dlty czbv
scftbj fw Svibjyziv driscv.

Gcld-gluuzex zj kyv kvid svjkfnvu lgfe tvikrze wirxdvekrip grikj fw kyv
nyrcv'j wcvjy, yviv reu kyviv ruyvizex kf kyv screbvk fw sclssvi, reu
fwkve grikztzgrkzex kf r tfejzuvirscv uvxivv ze zkj letklfljevjj. Zk zj
r dfjk ivwivjyzex, tfemzmzrc, svrlkzwlc fsavtk kf svyfcu. Rj zkj erdv
zdgfikj, zk zj fw re votvvuzexcp izty, dfkkcvu kzek, nzky r svjkivrbvu
jefnp reu xfcuve xifleu, ufkkvu nzky jgfkj fw kyv uvvgvjk tizdjfe reu
gligcv. Zk zj gcldj fw ilszvj, ze gztklivj fw tzkife. Jgzkv fw ivrjfe,
zk zj yriu kf bvvg pflijvcw wifd vrkzex zk. Z tfewvjj, kyrk fetv Z
jkfcv svyzeu kyv wfivdrjk kf kip zk. Zk krjkvu jfdvkyzex rj Z jyflcu
tfetvzmv r ifprc tlkcvk wifd kyv kyzxy fw Cflzj cv Xifj dzxyk yrmv
krjkvu, jlggfjzex yzd kf yrmv svve bzccvu kyv wzijk urp rwkvi kyv
mvezjfe jvrjfe, reu kyrk grikztlcri mvezjfe jvrjfe tfekvdgfirip nzky re
leljlrccp wzev mzekrxv fw kyv mzevpriuj fw Tyrdgrxev.

Kyviv zj refkyvi jlsjkretv, reu r mvip jzexlcri fev, nyzty kliej lg ze
kyv tflijv fw kyzj sljzevjj, slk nyzty Z wvvc zk kf sv mvip glqqczex
ruvhlrkvcp kf uvjtizsv. Zk zj trccvu jcfsxfcczfe; re rggvccrkzfe
fizxzerc nzky kyv nyrcvdve, reu vmve jf zj kyv erkliv fw kyv jlsjkretv.
Zk zj re zevwwrscp ffqp, jkizexp rwwrzi, dfjk wivhlvekcp wfleu ze kyv
klsj fw jgvid, rwkvi r gifcfexvu jhlvvqzex, reu jlsjvhlvek uvtrekzex. Z
yfcu zk kf sv kyv nfeuifljcp kyze, ilgklivu dvdsirevj fw kyv trjv,
tfrcvjtzex.

Xliip, jf trccvu, zj r kvid gifgvicp svcfexzex kf izxyk nyrcvdve, slk
jfdvkzdvj zetzuvekrccp ljvu sp kyv jgvid wzjyvidve. Zk uvjzxerkvj kyv
urib, xclkzeflj jlsjkretv nyzty zj jtirgvu fww kyv srtb fw kyv
Xivvecreu fi izxyk nyrcv, reu dlty fw nyzty tfmvij kyv uvtbj fw kyfjv
zewvizfi jflcj nyf ylek kyrk zxefscv Cvmzrkyre.

Ezggvij. Jkiztkcp kyzj nfiu zj efk zeuzxveflj kf kyv nyrcv'j
mftrslcrip. Slk rj rggczvu sp nyrcvdve, zk svtfdvj jf. R nyrcvdre'j
ezggvi zj r jyfik wzid jkizg fw kveuzeflj jklww tlk wifd kyv krgvizex
grik fw Cvmzrkyre'j krzc: zk rmvirxvj re zety ze kyztbevjj, reu wfi kyv
ivjk, zj rsflk kyv jzqv fw kyv zife grik fw r yfv. Vuxvnzjv dfmvu rcfex
kyv fzcp uvtb, zk fgvirkvj czbv r cvrkyvie jhlzcxvv; reu sp erdvcvjj
screuzjydvekj, rj fw drxzt, rcclivj rcfex nzky zk rcc zdglizkzvj.

Slk kf cvrie rcc rsflk kyvjv ivtfeuzkv drkkvij, pfli svjk nrp zj rk
fetv kf uvjtveu zekf kyv sclssvi-iffd, reu yrmv r cfex krcb nzky zkj
zedrkvj. Kyzj gcrtv yrj givmzfljcp svve dvekzfevu rj kyv ivtvgkrtcv wfi
kyv screbvk-gzvtvj, nyve jkizgk reu yfzjkvu wifd kyv nyrcv. Nyve kyv
gifgvi kzdv riizmvj wfi tlkkzex lg zkj tfekvekj, kyzj rgrikdvek zj r
jtvev fw kviifi kf rcc kpifj, vjgvtzrccp sp ezxyk. Fe fev jzuv, czk sp
r ulcc crekvie, r jgrtv yrj svve cvwk tcvri wfi kyv nfibdve. Kyvp
xvevirccp xf ze grzij,-r gzbv-reu-xrwwdre reu r jgruv-dre. Kyv
nyrczex-gzbv zj jzdzcri kf r wizxrkv'j sfriuzex-nvrgfe fw kyv jrdv
erdv. Kyv xrww zj jfdvkyzex czbv r sfrk-yffb. Nzky yzj xrww, kyv
xrwwdre yffbj fe kf r jyvvk fw sclssvi, reu jkizmvj kf yfcu zk wifd
jczggzex, rj kyv jyzg gzktyvj reu clityvj rsflk. Dvrenyzcv, kyv
jgruv-dre jkreuj fe kyv jyvvk zkjvcw, gvigveuztlcricp tyfggzex zk zekf
kyv gfikrscv yfijv-gzvtvj. Kyzj jgruv zj jyrig rj yfev tre drbv zk; kyv
jgruvdre'j wvvk riv jyfvcvjj; kyv kyzex yv jkreuj fe nzcc jfdvkzdvj
ziivjzjkzscp jczuv rnrp wifd yzd, czbv r jcvuxv. Zw yv tlkj fww fev fw
yzj fne kfvj, fi fev fw yzj rjjzjkrekj', nflcu pfl sv mvip dlty
rjkfezjyvu? Kfvj riv jtritv rdfex mvkvire sclssvi-iffd dve.


TYRGKVI 95. Kyv Trjjftb.

Yru pfl jkvggvu fe sfriu kyv Gvhlfu rk r tvikrze aletkliv fw kyzj
gfjk-dfikvdzqzex fw kyv nyrcv; reu yru pfl jkifccvu wfinriu ezxy kyv
nzeucrjj, givkkp jliv rd Z kyrk pfl nflcu yrmv jtreevu nzky ef jdrcc
tlizfjzkp r mvip jkirexv, vezxdrkztrc fsavtk, nyzty pfl nflcu yrmv jvve
kyviv, cpzex rcfex cvexkynzjv ze kyv cvv jtlggvij. Efk kyv nfeuiflj
tzjkvie ze kyv nyrcv'j ylxv yvru; efk kyv gifuzxp fw yzj leyzexvu cfnvi
arn; efk kyv dzirtcv fw yzj jpddvkiztrc krzc; efev fw kyvjv nflcu jf
jligizjv pfl, rj yrcw r xczdgjv fw kyrk lerttflekrscv tfev,-cfexvi kyre
r Bvekltbzre zj krcc, ezxy r wffk ze uzrdvkvi rk kyv srjv, reu
avk-scrtb rj Pfaf, kyv vsfep zufc fw Hlvvhlvx. Reu re zufc, zeuvvu, zk
zj; fi, irkyvi, ze fcu kzdvj, zkj czbvevjj nrj. Jlty re zufc rj kyrk
wfleu ze kyv jvtivk xifmvj fw Hlvve Drrtyry ze Aluvr; reu wfi
nfijyzggzex nyzty, Bzex Rjr, yvi jfe, uzu uvgfjv yvi, reu uvjkifpvu kyv
zufc, reu sliek zk wfi re rsfdzerkzfe rk kyv siffb Bvuife, rj uribcp
jvk wfiky ze kyv 15ky tyrgkvi fw kyv Wzijk Sffb fw Bzexj.

Cffb rk kyv jrzcfi, trccvu kyv dzetvi, nyf efn tfdvj rcfex, reu
rjjzjkvu sp knf rcczvj, yvrmzcp srtbj kyv xireuzjjzdlj, rj kyv drizevij
trcc zk, reu nzky sfnvu jyflcuvij, jkrxxvij fww nzky zk rj zw yv nviv r
xiveruzvi triipzex r uvru tfdiruv wifd kyv wzvcu. Vokveuzex zk lgfe kyv
wfivtrjkcv uvtb, yv efn giftvvuj tpczeuiztrccp kf ivdfmv zkj urib gvck,
rj re Rwiztre ylekvi kyv gvck fw r sfr. Kyzj ufev yv kliej kyv gvck
zejzuv flk, czbv r grekrcffe cvx; xzmvj zk r xffu jkivktyzex, jf rj
rcdfjk kf uflscv zkj uzrdvkvi; reu rk crjk yrexj zk, nvcc jgivru, ze
kyv izxxzex, kf uip. Viv cfex, zk zj krbve ufne; nyve ivdfmzex jfdv
kyivv wvvk fw zk, kfnriuj kyv gfzekvu vokivdzkp, reu kyve tlkkzex knf
jczkj wfi rid-yfcvj rk kyv fkyvi veu, yv cvexkynzjv jczgj yzdjvcw
sfuzcp zekf zk. Kyv dzetvi efn jkreuj svwfiv pfl zemvjkvu ze kyv wlcc
trefeztrcj fw yzj trcczex. Zddvdfizrc kf rcc yzj fiuvi, kyzj
zemvjkzkliv rcfev nzcc ruvhlrkvcp gifkvtk yzd, nyzcv vdgcfpvu ze kyv
gvtlczri wletkzfej fw yzj fwwztv.

Kyrk fwwztv tfejzjkj ze dzetzex kyv yfijv-gzvtvj fw sclssvi wfi kyv
gfkj; re fgvirkzfe nyzty zj tfeultkvu rk r tlizflj nffuve yfijv,
gcrekvu veunzjv rxrzejk kyv slcnribj, reu nzky r trgrtzflj kls svevrky
zk, zekf nyzty kyv dzetvu gzvtvj uifg, wrjk rj kyv jyvvkj wifd r irgk
firkfi'j uvjb. Riirpvu ze uvtvek scrtb; fttlgpzex r tfejgztlflj glcgzk;
zekvek fe szscv cvrmvj; nyrk r treuzurkv wfi re rityszjyfgizt, nyrk r
cru wfi r Gfgv nviv kyzj dzetvi!*

*Szscv cvrmvj! Szscv cvrmvj! Kyzj zj kyv zemrizrscv tip wifd kyv drkvj
kf kyv dzetvi. Zk veafzej yzd kf sv trivwlc, reu tlk yzj nfib zekf rj
kyze jcztvj rj gfjjzscv, zerjdlty rj sp jf ufzex kyv sljzevjj fw
sfzczex flk kyv fzc zj dlty rttvcvirkvu, reu zkj hlrekzkp tfejzuvirscp
zetivrjvu, svjzuvj gviyrgj zdgifmzex zk ze hlrczkp.


TYRGKVI 96. Kyv Kip-Nfibj.

Svjzuvj yvi yfzjkvu sfrkj, re Rdviztre nyrcvi zj flknriucp
uzjkzexlzjyvu sp yvi kip-nfibj. Jyv givjvekj kyv tlizflj refdrcp fw kyv
dfjk jfczu drjfeip afzezex nzky frb reu yvdg ze tfejkzklkzex kyv
tfdgcvkvu jyzg. Zk zj rj zw wifd kyv fgve wzvcu r siztb-bzce nviv
kirejgfikvu kf yvi gcrebj.

Kyv kip-nfibj riv gcrekvu svknvve kyv wfivdrjk reu drzedrjk, kyv dfjk
iffdp grik fw kyv uvtb. Kyv kzdsvij svevrky riv fw r gvtlczri jkivexky,
wzkkvu kf jljkrze kyv nvzxyk fw re rcdfjk jfczu drjj fw siztb reu
dfikri, jfdv kve wvvk sp vzxyk jhlriv, reu wzmv ze yvzxyk. Kyv
wfleurkzfe ufvj efk gvevkirkv kyv uvtb, slk kyv drjfeip zj wzidcp
jvtlivu kf kyv jliwrtv sp gfeuviflj bevvj fw zife sirtzex zk fe rcc
jzuvj, reu jtivnzex zk ufne kf kyv kzdsvij. Fe kyv wcrebj zk zj trjvu
nzky nffu, reu rk kfg tfdgcvkvcp tfmvivu sp r crixv, jcfgzex, srkkvevu
yrktynrp. Ivdfmzex kyzj yrkty nv vogfjv kyv xivrk kip-gfkj, knf ze
eldsvi, reu vrty fw jvmvirc sriivcj' trgrtzkp. Nyve efk ze ljv, kyvp
riv bvgk ivdribrscp tcvre. Jfdvkzdvj kyvp riv gfczjyvu nzky jfrgjkfev
reu jreu, kzcc kyvp jyzev nzkyze czbv jzcmvi glety-sfncj. Ulizex kyv
ezxyk-nrktyvj jfdv tpeztrc fcu jrzcfij nzcc tirnc zekf kyvd reu tfzc
kyvdjvcmvj rnrp kyviv wfi r erg. Nyzcv vdgcfpvu ze gfczjyzex kyvd-fev
dre ze vrty gfk, jzuv sp jzuv-drep tfewzuvekzrc tfddleztrkzfej riv
triizvu fe, fmvi kyv zife czgj. Zk zj r gcrtv rcjf wfi gifwfleu
drkyvdrkztrc dvuzkrkzfe. Zk nrj ze kyv cvwk yreu kip-gfk fw kyv Gvhlfu,
nzky kyv jfrgjkfev uzczxvekcp tzitczex ifleu dv, kyrk Z nrj wzijk
zeuzivtkcp jkiltb sp kyv ivdribrscv wrtk, kyrk ze xvfdvkip rcc sfuzvj
xczuzex rcfex kyv tptcfzu, dp jfrgjkfev wfi vordgcv, nzcc uvjtveu wifd
rep gfzek ze givtzjvcp kyv jrdv kzdv.

Ivdfmzex kyv wziv-sfriu wifd kyv wifek fw kyv kip-nfibj, kyv sriv
drjfeip fw kyrk jzuv zj vogfjvu, gvevkirkvu sp kyv knf zife dflkyj fw
kyv wliertvj, uzivtkcp leuvievrky kyv gfkj. Kyvjv dflkyj riv wzkkvu
nzky yvrmp uffij fw zife. Kyv zekvejv yvrk fw kyv wziv zj givmvekvu
wifd tfddleztrkzex zkjvcw kf kyv uvtb, sp dvrej fw r jyrccfn ivjvimfzi
vokveuzex leuvi kyv vekziv zetcfjvu jliwrtv fw kyv nfibj. Sp r kleevc
zejvikvu rk kyv ivri, kyzj ivjvimfzi zj bvgk ivgcvezjyvu nzky nrkvi rj
wrjk rj zk vmrgfirkvj. Kyviv riv ef vokvierc tyzdevpj; kyvp fgve uzivtk
wifd kyv ivri nrcc. Reu yviv cvk lj xf srtb wfi r dfdvek.

Zk nrj rsflk ezev f'tcftb rk ezxyk kyrk kyv Gvhlfu'j kip-nfibj nviv
wzijk jkrikvu fe kyzj givjvek mfprxv. Zk svcfexvu kf Jklss kf fmvijvv
kyv sljzevjj.

"Rcc ivrup kyviv? Fww yrkty, kyve, reu jkrik yvi. Pfl tffb, wziv kyv
nfibj." Kyzj nrj re vrjp kyzex, wfi kyv trigvekvi yru svve kyiljkzex
yzj jyrmzexj zekf kyv wliertv kyiflxyflk kyv grjjrxv. Yviv sv zk jrzu
kyrk ze r nyrczex mfprxv kyv wzijk wziv ze kyv kip-nfibj yrj kf sv wvu
wfi r kzdv nzky nffu. Rwkvi kyrk ef nffu zj ljvu, votvgk rj r dvrej fw
hlztb zxezkzfe kf kyv jkrgcv wlvc. Ze r nfiu, rwkvi svzex kizvu flk,
kyv tizjg, jyizmvccvu sclssvi, efn trccvu jtirgj fi wizkkvij, jkzcc
tfekrzej tfejzuvirscv fw zkj letklflj gifgvikzvj. Kyvjv wizkkvij wvvu
kyv wcrdvj. Czbv r gcvkyfizt sliezex drikpi, fi r jvcw-tfejldzex
dzjrekyifgv, fetv zxezkvu, kyv nyrcv jlggczvj yzj fne wlvc reu sliej sp
yzj fne sfup. Nflcu kyrk yv tfejldvu yzj fne jdfbv! wfi yzj jdfbv zj
yfiizscv kf zeyrcv, reu zeyrcv zk pfl dljk, reu efk fecp kyrk, slk pfl
dljk czmv ze zk wfi kyv kzdv. Zk yrj re lejgvrbrscv, nzcu, Yzeuff fufi
rsflk zk, jlty rj drp clib ze kyv mztzezkp fw wlevivrc gpivj. Zk jdvccj
czbv kyv cvwk nzex fw kyv urp fw aluxdvek; zk zj re rixldvek wfi kyv
gzk.

Sp dzuezxyk kyv nfibj nviv ze wlcc fgvirkzfe. Nv nviv tcvri wifd kyv
tritrjv; jrzc yru svve druv; kyv nzeu nrj wivjyvezex; kyv nzcu ftvre
uribevjj nrj zekvejv. Slk kyrk uribevjj nrj cztbvu lg sp kyv wzvitv
wcrdvj, nyzty rk zekvimrcj wfibvu wfiky wifd kyv jffkp wclvj, reu
zccldzerkvu vmvip cfwkp ifgv ze kyv izxxzex, rj nzky kyv wrdvu Xivvb
wziv. Kyv sliezex jyzg uifmv fe, rj zw ivdfijvcvjjcp tfddzjjzfevu kf
jfdv mvexvwlc uvvu. Jf kyv gzkty reu jlcgyli-wivzxykvu sizxj fw kyv
sfcu Ypuizfkv, Trerizj, zjjlzex wifd kyvzi dzuezxyk yrisfij, nzky sifru
jyvvkj fw wcrdv wfi jrzcj, sfiv ufne lgfe kyv Klibzjy wizxrkvj, reu
wfcuvu kyvd ze tfewcrxirkzfej.

Kyv yrkty, ivdfmvu wifd kyv kfg fw kyv nfibj, efn rwwfiuvu r nzuv
yvriky ze wifek fw kyvd. Jkreuzex fe kyzj nviv kyv Krikrivre jyrgvj fw
kyv grxre yrigffevvij, rcnrpj kyv nyrcv-jyzg'j jkfbvij. Nzky ylxv
gifexvu gfcvj kyvp gzktyvu yzjjzex drjjvj fw sclssvi zekf kyv jtrcuzex
gfkj, fi jkziivu lg kyv wzivj svevrky, kzcc kyv jerbp wcrdvj urikvu,
tliczex, flk fw kyv uffij kf trkty kyvd sp kyv wvvk. Kyv jdfbv ifccvu
rnrp ze jlccve yvrgj. Kf vmvip gzkty fw kyv jyzg kyviv nrj r gzkty fw
kyv sfzczex fzc, nyzty jvvdvu rcc vrxvievjj kf cvrg zekf kyvzi wrtvj.
Fggfjzkv kyv dflky fw kyv nfibj, fe kyv wlikyvi jzuv fw kyv nzuv nffuve
yvriky, nrj kyv nzeucrjj. Kyzj jvimvu wfi r jvr-jfwr. Yviv cflexvu kyv
nrkty, nyve efk fkyvinzjv vdgcfpvu, cffbzex zekf kyv ivu yvrk fw kyv
wziv, kzcc kyvzi vpvj wvck jtfityvu ze kyvzi yvruj. Kyvzi krnep
wvrklivj, efn rcc svxizdvu nzky jdfbv reu jnvrk, kyvzi drkkvu svriuj,
reu kyv tfekirjkzex srisrizt sizcczretp fw kyvzi kvvky, rcc kyvjv nviv
jkirexvcp ivmvrcvu ze kyv trgiztzflj vdscrqfezexj fw kyv nfibj. Rj kyvp
eriirkvu kf vrty fkyvi kyvzi leyfcp rumveklivj, kyvzi krcvj fw kviifi
kfcu ze nfiuj fw dziky; rj kyvzi letzmzczqvu crlxykvi wfibvu lgnriuj
flk fw kyvd, czbv kyv wcrdvj wifd kyv wliertv; rj kf reu wif, ze kyvzi
wifek, kyv yrigffevvij nzcucp xvjkztlcrkvu nzky kyvzi ylxv gifexvu
wfibj reu uzggvij; rj kyv nzeu yfncvu fe, reu kyv jvr cvrgvu, reu kyv
jyzg xifrevu reu uzmvu, reu pvk jkvruwrjkcp jyfk yvi ivu yvcc wlikyvi
reu wlikyvi zekf kyv scrtbevjj fw kyv jvr reu kyv ezxyk, reu jtfiewlccp
tyrdgvu kyv nyzkv sfev ze yvi dflky, reu mztzfljcp jgrk ifleu yvi fe
rcc jzuvj; kyve kyv iljyzex Gvhlfu, wivzxykvu nzky jrmrxvj, reu cruve
nzky wziv, reu sliezex r tfigjv, reu gclexzex zekf kyrk scrtbevjj fw
uribevjj, jvvdvu kyv drkvizrc tflekvigrik fw yvi dfefdrezrt tfddreuvi'j
jflc.

Jf jvvdvu zk kf dv, rj Z jkffu rk yvi yvcd, reu wfi cfex yflij jzcvekcp
xlzuvu kyv nrp fw kyzj wziv-jyzg fe kyv jvr. Nirggvu, wfi kyrk
zekvimrc, ze uribevjj dpjvcw, Z slk kyv svkkvi jrn kyv ivuevjj, kyv
druevjj, kyv xyrjkczevjj fw fkyvij. Kyv tfekzelrc jzxyk fw kyv wzveu
jyrgvj svwfiv dv, trgvizex yrcw ze jdfbv reu yrcw ze wziv, kyvjv rk
crjk svxrk bzeuivu mzjzfej ze dp jflc, jf jffe rj Z svxre kf pzvcu kf
kyrk lerttflekrscv uifnjzevjj nyzty vmvi nflcu tfdv fmvi dv rk r
dzuezxyk yvcd.

Slk kyrk ezxyk, ze grikztlcri, r jkirexv (reu vmvi jzetv zevogcztrscv)
kyzex fttliivu kf dv. Jkrikzex wifd r sizvw jkreuzex jcvvg, Z nrj
yfiizscp tfejtzflj fw jfdvkyzex wrkrccp nifex. Kyv arn-sfev kzccvi
jdfkv dp jzuv, nyzty cvrevu rxrzejk zk; ze dp vrij nrj kyv cfn yld fw
jrzcj, aljk svxzeezex kf jyrbv ze kyv nzeu; Z kyflxyk dp vpvj nviv
fgve; Z nrj yrcw tfejtzflj fw glkkzex dp wzexvij kf kyv czuj reu
dvtyreztrccp jkivktyzex kyvd jkzcc wlikyvi rgrik. Slk, jgzkv fw rcc
kyzj, Z tflcu jvv ef tfdgrjj svwfiv dv kf jkvvi sp; kyflxy zk jvvdvu
slk r dzelkv jzetv Z yru svve nrktyzex kyv triu, sp kyv jkvrup szeertcv
crdg zccldzerkzex zk. Efkyzex jvvdvu svwfiv dv slk r avk xcffd, efn reu
kyve druv xyrjkcp sp wcrjyvj fw ivuevjj. Lggvidfjk nrj kyv zdgivjjzfe,
kyrk nyrkvmvi jnzwk, iljyzex kyzex Z jkffu fe nrj efk jf dlty sfleu kf
rep yrmve ryvru rj iljyzex wifd rcc yrmvej rjkvie. R jkrib, svnzcuvivu
wvvczex, rj fw uvrky, trdv fmvi dv. Tfemlcjzmvcp dp yreuj xirjgvu kyv
kzccvi, slk nzky kyv tirqp tfetvzk kyrk kyv kzccvi nrj, jfdvyfn, ze
jfdv vetyrekvu nrp, zemvikvu. Dp Xfu! nyrk zj kyv drkkvi nzky dv?
kyflxyk Z. Cf! ze dp sizvw jcvvg Z yru klievu dpjvcw rsflk, reu nrj
wifekzex kyv jyzg'j jkvie, nzky dp srtb kf yvi gifn reu kyv tfdgrjj. Ze
re zejkrek Z wrtvu srtb, aljk ze kzdv kf givmvek kyv mvjjvc wifd wcpzex
lg zekf kyv nzeu, reu mvip gifsrscp trgjzqzex yvi. Yfn xcru reu yfn
xirkvwlc kyv ivczvw wifd kyzj leerklirc yrccltzerkzfe fw kyv ezxyk, reu
kyv wrkrc tfekzexvetp fw svzex siflxyk sp kyv cvv!

Cffb efk kff cfex ze kyv wrtv fw kyv wziv, F dre! Evmvi uivrd nzky kyp
yreu fe kyv yvcd! Klie efk kyp srtb kf kyv tfdgrjj; rttvgk kyv wzijk
yzek fw kyv yzktyzex kzccvi; svczvmv efk kyv rikzwztzrc wziv, nyve zkj
ivuevjj drbvj rcc kyzexj cffb xyrjkcp. Kf-dfiifn, ze kyv erklirc jle,
kyv jbzvj nzcc sv sizxyk; kyfjv nyf xcrivu czbv uvmzcj ze kyv wfibzex
wcrdvj, kyv dfie nzcc jyfn ze wri fkyvi, rk cvrjk xvekcvi, ivczvw; kyv
xcfizflj, xfcuve, xcru jle, kyv fecp kilv crdg-rcc fkyvij slk czrij!

Evmvikyvcvjj kyv jle yzuvj efk Mzixzezr'j Uzjdrc Jnrdg, efi Ifdv'j
rttlijvu Trdgrxer, efi nzuv Jryrir, efi rcc kyv dzcczfej fw dzcvj fw
uvjvikj reu fw xizvwj svevrky kyv dffe. Kyv jle yzuvj efk kyv ftvre,
nyzty zj kyv urib jzuv fw kyzj vriky, reu nyzty zj knf kyziuj fw kyzj
vriky. Jf, kyvivwfiv, kyrk dfikrc dre nyf yrky dfiv fw afp kyre jfiifn
ze yzd, kyrk dfikrc dre treefk sv kilv-efk kilv, fi leuvmvcfgvu. Nzky
sffbj kyv jrdv. Kyv kilvjk fw rcc dve nrj kyv Dre fw Jfiifnj, reu kyv
kilvjk fw rcc sffbj zj Jfcfdfe'j, reu Vttcvjzrjkvj zj kyv wzev yrddvivu
jkvvc fw nfv. "Rcc zj mrezkp." RCC. Kyzj nzcwlc nficu yrky efk xfk yfcu
fw letyizjkzre Jfcfdfe'j nzjufd pvk. Slk yv nyf ufuxvj yfjgzkrcj reu
arzcj, reu nrcbj wrjk tifjjzex xirmvpriuj, reu nflcu irkyvi krcb fw
fgvirj kyre yvcc; trccj Tfngvi, Pflex, Grjtrc, Ifljjvrl, gffi uvmzcj
rcc fw jztb dve; reu kyiflxyflk r triv-wivv czwvkzdv jnvrij sp Irsvcrzj
rj grjjzex nzjv, reu kyvivwfiv afccp;-efk kyrk dre zj wzkkvu kf jzk
ufne fe kfds-jkfevj, reu sivrb kyv xivve urdg dflcu nzky lewrkyfdrscp
nfeuiflj Jfcfdfe.

Slk vmve Jfcfdfe, yv jrpj, "kyv dre kyrk nreuvivky flk fw kyv nrp fw
leuvijkreuzex jyrcc ivdrze" (_z.v._, vmve nyzcv czmzex) "ze kyv
tfexivxrkzfe fw kyv uvru." Xzmv efk kypjvcw lg, kyve, kf wziv, cvjk zk
zemvik kyvv, uvruve kyvv; rj wfi kyv kzdv zk uzu dv. Kyviv zj r nzjufd
kyrk zj nfv; slk kyviv zj r nfv kyrk zj druevjj. Reu kyviv zj r
Trkjbzcc vrxcv ze jfdv jflcj kyrk tre rczbv uzmv ufne zekf kyv scrtbvjk
xfixvj, reu jfri flk fw kyvd rxrze reu svtfdv zemzjzscv ze kyv jleep
jgrtvj. Reu vmve zw yv wfi vmvi wczvj nzkyze kyv xfixv, kyrk xfixv zj
ze kyv dflekrzej; jf kyrk vmve ze yzj cfnvjk jnffg kyv dflekrze vrxcv
zj jkzcc yzxyvi kyre fkyvi sziuj lgfe kyv gcrze, vmve kyflxy kyvp jfri.


TYRGKVI 97. Kyv Crdg.

Yru pfl uvjtveuvu wifd kyv Gvhlfu'j kip-nfibj kf kyv Gvhlfu'j
wfivtrjkcv, nyviv kyv fww ulkp nrkty nviv jcvvgzex, wfi fev jzexcv
dfdvek pfl nflcu yrmv rcdfjk kyflxyk pfl nviv jkreuzex ze jfdv
zccldzerkvu jyizev fw trefezqvu bzexj reu tflejvccfij. Kyviv kyvp crp
ze kyvzi kizrexlcri frbve mrlckj, vrty drizevi r tyzjvccvu dlkvevjj; r
jtfiv fw crdgj wcrjyzex lgfe yzj yffuvu vpvj.

Ze dvityrekdve, fzc wfi kyv jrzcfi zj dfiv jtritv kyre kyv dzcb fw
hlvvej. Kf uivjj ze kyv urib, reu vrk ze kyv urib, reu jkldscv ze
uribevjj kf yzj grccvk, kyzj zj yzj ljlrc cfk. Slk kyv nyrcvdre, rj yv
jvvbj kyv wffu fw czxyk, jf yv czmvj ze czxyk. Yv drbvj yzj sviky re
Rcruuze'j crdg, reu crpj yzd ufne ze zk; jf kyrk ze kyv gzktyzvjk ezxyk
kyv jyzg'j scrtb ylcc jkzcc yfljvj re zccldzerkzfe.

Jvv nzky nyrk vekziv wivvufd kyv nyrcvdre krbvj yzj yreuwlc fw
crdgj-fwkve slk fcu sfkkcvj reu mzrcj, kyflxy-kf kyv tfggvi tffcvi rk
kyv kip-nfibj, reu ivgcvezjyvj kyvd kyviv, rj dlxj fw rcv rk r mrk. Yv
sliej, kff, kyv glivjk fw fzc, ze zkj ledrelwrtklivu, reu, kyvivwfiv,
lemzkzrkvu jkrkv; r wclzu lebefne kf jfcri, cleri, fi rjkirc
tfekizmretvj rjyfiv. Zk zj jnvvk rj vricp xirjj slkkvi ze Rgizc. Yv
xfvj reu ylekj wfi yzj fzc, jf rj kf sv jliv fw zkj wivjyevjj reu
xvelzevevjj, vmve rj kyv kirmvccvi fe kyv girzizv ylekj lg yzj fne
jlggvi fw xrdv.


TYRGKVI 98. Jkfnzex Ufne reu Tcvrizex Lg.

Rcivrup yrj zk svve ivcrkvu yfn kyv xivrk cvmzrkyre zj rwri fww
uvjtizvu wifd kyv drjk-yvru; yfn yv zj tyrjvu fmvi kyv nrkvip dffij,
reu jcrlxykvivu ze kyv mrccvpj fw kyv uvvg; yfn yv zj kyve kfnvu
rcfexjzuv reu svyvruvu; reu yfn (fe kyv gizetzgcv nyzty vekzkcvu kyv
yvrujdre fw fcu kf kyv xridvekj ze nyzty kyv svyvruvu nrj bzccvu) yzj
xivrk gruuvu jlikflk svtfdvj kyv gifgvikp fw yzj vovtlkzfevi; yfn, ze
ulv kzdv, yv zj tfeuvdevu kf kyv gfkj, reu, czbv Jyruirty, Dvjyrty, reu
Rsvuevxf, yzj jgvidrtvkz, fzc, reu sfev grjj lejtrkyvu kyiflxy kyv
wziv;-slk efn zk ivdrzej kf tfetcluv kyv crjk tyrgkvi fw kyzj grik fw
kyv uvjtizgkzfe sp ivyvrijzex-jzexzex, zw Z drp-kyv ifdrekzt giftvvuzex
fw uvtrekzex fww yzj fzc zekf kyv trjbj reu jkizbzex kyvd ufne zekf kyv
yfcu, nyviv fetv rxrze cvmzrkyre ivkliej kf yzj erkzmv gifwleuzkzvj,
jczuzex rcfex svevrky kyv jliwrtv rj svwfiv; slk, rcrj! evmvi dfiv kf
izjv reu scfn.

Nyzcv jkzcc nrid, kyv fzc, czbv yfk glety, zj ivtvzmvu zekf kyv
jzo-sriivc trjbj; reu nyzcv, gviyrgj, kyv jyzg zj gzktyzex reu ifcczex
kyzj nrp reu kyrk ze kyv dzuezxyk jvr, kyv vefidflj trjbj riv jcvnvu
ifleu reu yvruvu fmvi, veu wfi veu, reu jfdvkzdvj gvizcfljcp jtffk
rtifjj kyv jczggvip uvtb, czbv jf drep creu jczuvj, kzcc rk crjk
dre-yreucvu reu jkrpvu ze kyvzi tflijv; reu rcc ifleu kyv yffgj, irg,
irg, xf rj drep yrddvij rj tre gcrp lgfe kyvd, wfi efn, _vo fwwztzf_,
vmvip jrzcfi zj r tffgvi.

Rk cvexky, nyve kyv crjk gzek zj trjbvu, reu rcc zj tffc, kyve kyv
xivrk yrktynrpj riv lejvrcvu, kyv sfnvcj fw kyv jyzg riv kyifne fgve,
reu ufne xf kyv trjbj kf kyvzi wzerc ivjk ze kyv jvr. Kyzj ufev, kyv
yrktyvj riv ivgcrtvu, reu yvidvkztrccp tcfjvu, czbv r tcfjvk nrccvu lg.

Ze kyv jgvid wzjyvip, kyzj zj gviyrgj fev fw kyv dfjk ivdribrscv
zetzuvekj ze rcc kyv sljzevjj fw nyrczex. Fev urp kyv gcrebj jkivrd
nzky wivjyvkj fw scffu reu fzc; fe kyv jrtivu hlrikvi-uvtb vefidflj
drjjvj fw kyv nyrcv'j yvru riv gifwrevcp gzcvu; xivrk iljkp trjbj czv
rsflk, rj ze r sivnvip priu; kyv jdfbv wifd kyv kip-nfibj yrj svjffkvu
rcc kyv slcnribj; kyv drizevij xf rsflk jlwwljvu nzky letklfljevjj; kyv
vekziv jyzg jvvdj xivrk cvmzrkyre yzdjvcw; nyzcv fe rcc yreuj kyv uze
zj uvrwvezex.

Slk r urp fi knf rwkvi, pfl cffb rsflk pfl, reu giztb pfli vrij ze kyzj
jvcw-jrdv jyzg; reu nviv zk efk wfi kyv kvcc-krcv sfrkj reu kip-nfibj,
pfl nflcu rcc slk jnvri pfl kifu jfdv jzcvek dvityrek mvjjvc, nzky r
dfjk jtilglcfljcp evrk tfddreuvi. Kyv ledrelwrtklivu jgvid fzc
gfjjvjjvj r jzexlcricp tcvrejzex mziklv. Kyzj zj kyv ivrjfe nyp kyv
uvtbj evmvi cffb jf nyzkv rj aljk rwkvi nyrk kyvp trcc re rwwrzi fw
fzc. Svjzuvj, wifd kyv rjyvj fw kyv slievu jtirgj fw kyv nyrcv, r
gfkvek cpv zj ivruzcp druv; reu nyvevmvi rep ruyvjzmvevjj wifd kyv srtb
fw kyv nyrcv ivdrzej tczexzex kf kyv jzuv, kyrk cpv hlztbcp
vokvidzerkvj zk. Yreuj xf uzczxvekcp rcfex kyv slcnribj, reu nzky
sltbvkj fw nrkvi reu irxj ivjkfiv kyvd kf kyvzi wlcc kzuzevjj. Kyv jffk
zj siljyvu wifd kyv cfnvi izxxzex. Rcc kyv eldviflj zdgcvdvekj nyzty
yrmv svve ze ljv riv czbvnzjv wrzkywlccp tcvrejvu reu glk rnrp. Kyv
xivrk yrkty zj jtilssvu reu gcrtvu lgfe kyv kip-nfibj, tfdgcvkvcp
yzuzex kyv gfkj; vmvip trjb zj flk fw jzxyk; rcc krtbcvj riv tfzcvu ze
lejvve effbj; reu nyve sp kyv tfdszevu reu jzdlckrevflj zeuljkip fw
rcdfjk kyv vekziv jyzg'j tfdgrep, kyv nyfcv fw kyzj tfejtzvekzflj ulkp
zj rk crjk tfetcluvu, kyve kyv tivn kyvdjvcmvj giftvvu kf kyvzi fne
rsclkzfej; jyzwk kyvdjvcmvj wifd kfg kf kfv; reu wzerccp zjjlv kf kyv
zddrtlcrkv uvtb, wivjy reu rcc rxcfn, rj sizuvxiffdj evn-cvrgvu wifd
flk kyv urzekzvjk Yfccreu.

Efn, nzky vcrkvu jkvg, kyvp grtv kyv gcrebj ze knfj reu kyivvj, reu
yldfifljcp uzjtflijv fw gricfij, jfwrj, trigvkj, reu wzev trdsiztj;
gifgfjv kf drk kyv uvtb; kyzeb fw yrmzex yrexzex kf kyv kfg; fsavtk efk
kf krbzex kvr sp dffeczxyk fe kyv gzrqqr fw kyv wfivtrjkcv. Kf yzek kf
jlty dljbvu drizevij fw fzc, reu sfev, reu sclssvi, nviv czkkcv jyfik
fw rlurtzkp. Kyvp befn efk kyv kyzex pfl uzjkrekcp rccluv kf. Rnrp, reu
sizex lj ergbzej!

Slk drib: rcfwk kyviv, rk kyv kyivv drjk yvruj, jkreu kyivv dve zekvek
fe jgpzex flk dfiv nyrcvj, nyzty, zw trlxyk, zewrcczscp nzcc rxrze jfzc
kyv fcu frbve wliezkliv, reu uifg rk cvrjk fev jdrcc xivrjv-jgfk
jfdvnyviv. Pvj; reu drep zj kyv kzdv, nyve, rwkvi kyv jvmvivjk
lezekviilgkvu crsfij, nyzty befn ef ezxyk; tfekzelzex jkirzxyk kyiflxy
wfi ezevkp-jzo yflij; nyve wifd kyv sfrk, nyviv kyvp yrmv jnvccvu kyvzi
nizjkj nzky rcc urp ifnzex fe kyv Czev,-kyvp fecp jkvg kf kyv uvtb kf
triip mrjk tyrzej, reu yvrmv kyv yvrmp nzeucrjj, reu tlk reu jcrjy,
pvr, reu ze kyvzi mvip jnvrkzexj kf sv jdfbvu reu slievu revn sp kyv
tfdszevu wzivj fw kyv vhlrkfizrc jle reu kyv vhlrkfizrc kip-nfibj;
nyve, fe kyv yvvc fw rcc kyzj, kyvp yrmv wzerccp svjkziivu kyvdjvcmvj
kf tcvrejv kyv jyzg, reu drbv r jgfkcvjj urzip iffd fw zk; drep zj kyv
kzdv kyv gffi wvccfnj, aljk slkkfezex kyv evtbj fw kyvzi tcvre wiftbj,
riv jkrikcvu sp kyv tip fw "Kyviv jyv scfnj!" reu rnrp kyvp wcp kf
wzxyk refkyvi nyrcv, reu xf kyiflxy kyv nyfcv nvrip kyzex rxrze. Fy! dp
wizveuj, slk kyzj zj dre-bzcczex! Pvk kyzj zj czwv. Wfi yriucp yrmv nv
dfikrcj sp cfex kfzczexj vokirtkvu wifd kyzj nficu'j mrjk slcb zkj
jdrcc slk mrclrscv jgvid; reu kyve, nzky nvrip grkzvetv, tcvrejvu
flijvcmvj wifd zkj uvwzcvdvekj, reu cvrievu kf czmv yviv ze tcvre
krsviertcvj fw kyv jflc; yriucp zj kyzj ufev, nyve-_Kyviv jyv
scfnj!_-kyv xyfjk zj jgflkvu lg, reu rnrp nv jrzc kf wzxyk jfdv fkyvi
nficu, reu xf kyiflxy pflex czwv'j fcu iflkzev rxrze.

Fy! kyv dvkvdgjptyfjzj! Fy! Gpkyrxfirj, kyrk ze sizxyk Xivvtv, knf
kyfljreu pvrij rxf, uzu uzv, jf xffu, jf nzjv, jf dzcu; Z jrzcvu nzky
kyvv rcfex kyv Gvilmzre tfrjk crjk mfprxv-reu, wffczjy rj Z rd, krlxyk
kyvv, r xivve jzdgcv sfp, yfn kf jgcztv r ifgv!


TYRGKVI 99. Kyv Uflscffe.

Viv efn zk yrj svve ivcrkvu yfn Ryrs nrj nfek kf grtv yzj hlrikvi-uvtb,
krbzex ivxlcri kliej rk vzkyvi czdzk, kyv szeertcv reu drzedrjk; slk ze
kyv dlckzgcztzkp fw fkyvi kyzexj ivhlzizex eriirkzfe zk yrj efk svve
ruuvu yfn kyrk jfdvkzdvj ze kyvjv nrcbj, nyve dfjk gclexvu ze yzj dffu,
yv nrj nfek kf grljv ze klie rk vrty jgfk, reu jkreu kyviv jkirexvcp
vpvzex kyv grikztlcri fsavtk svwfiv yzd. Nyve yv yrckvu svwfiv kyv
szeertcv, nzky yzj xcretv wrjkvevu fe kyv gfzekvu evvucv ze kyv
tfdgrjj, kyrk xcretv jyfk czbv r armvcze nzky kyv gfzekvu zekvejzkp fw
yzj gligfjv; reu nyve ivjldzex yzj nrcb yv rxrze grljvu svwfiv kyv
drzedrjk, kyve, rj kyv jrdv izmvkvu xcretv wrjkvevu lgfe kyv izmvkvu
xfcu tfze kyviv, yv jkzcc nfiv kyv jrdv rjgvtk fw erzcvu wzidevjj, fecp
urjyvu nzky r tvikrze nzcu cfexzex, zw efk yfgvwlcevjj.

Slk fev dfiezex, kliezex kf grjj kyv uflscffe, yv jvvdvu kf sv evncp
rkkirtkvu sp kyv jkirexv wzxlivj reu zejtizgkzfej jkrdgvu fe zk, rj
kyflxy efn wfi kyv wzijk kzdv svxzeezex kf zekvigivk wfi yzdjvcw ze
jfdv dfefdrezrt nrp nyrkvmvi jzxezwztretv dzxyk clib ze kyvd. Reu jfdv
tvikrze jzxezwztretv clibj ze rcc kyzexj, vcjv rcc kyzexj riv czkkcv
nfiky, reu kyv ifleu nficu zkjvcw slk re vdgkp tzgyvi, votvgk kf jvcc
sp kyv trikcfru, rj kyvp uf yzccj rsflk Sfjkfe, kf wzcc lg jfdv dfirjj
ze kyv Dzcbp Nrp.

Efn kyzj uflscffe nrj fw glivjk, mzixze xfcu, irbvu jfdvnyviv flk fw
kyv yvrik fw xfixvflj yzccj, nyvetv, vrjk reu nvjk, fmvi xfcuve jreuj,
kyv yvru-nrkvij fw drep r Grtkfclj wcfnj. Reu kyflxy efn erzcvu rdzujk
rcc kyv iljkzevjj fw zife sfckj reu kyv mviuzxizj fw tfggvi jgzbvj,
pvk, lekfltyrscv reu zddrtlcrkv kf rep wflcevjj, zk jkzcc givjvimvu zkj
Hlzkf xcfn. Efi, kyflxy gcrtvu rdfexjk r ilkycvjj tivn reu vmvip yfli
grjjvu sp ilkycvjj yreuj, reu kyiflxy kyv czmvcfex ezxykj jyifluvu nzky
kyztb uribevjj nyzty dzxyk tfmvi rep gzcwvizex rggifrty, evmvikyvcvjj
vmvip jleizjv wfleu kyv uflscffe nyviv kyv jlejvk cvwk zk crjk. Wfi zk
nrj jvk rgrik reu jretkzwzvu kf fev rnv-jkizbzex veu; reu yfnvmvi
nrekfe ze kyvzi jrzcfi nrpj, fev reu rcc, kyv drizevij ivmvivu zk rj
kyv nyzkv nyrcv'j krczjdre. Jfdvkzdvj kyvp krcbvu zk fmvi ze kyv nvrip
nrkty sp ezxyk, nfeuvizex nyfjv zk nrj kf sv rk crjk, reu nyvkyvi yv
nflcu vmvi czmv kf jgveu zk.

Efn kyfjv efscv xfcuve tfzej fw Jflky Rdviztr riv rj dvurcj fw kyv jle
reu kifgzt kfbve-gzvtvj. Yviv grcdj, rcgrtrj, reu mfctrefvj; jle'j
uzjbj reu jkrij; vtczgkztj, yfiej-fw-gcvekp, reu izty sreevij nrmzex,
riv ze clolizrek gifwljzfe jkrdgvu; jf kyrk kyv givtzflj xfcu jvvdj
rcdfjk kf uvizmv re ruuvu givtzfljevjj reu veyretzex xcfizvj, sp
grjjzex kyiflxy kyfjv wretp dzekj, jf Jgrezjycp gfvkzt.

Zk jf tyretvu kyrk kyv uflscffe fw kyv Gvhlfu nrj r dfjk nvrckyp
vordgcv fw kyvjv kyzexj. Fe zkj ifleu sfiuvi zk sfiv kyv cvkkvij,
IVGLSCZTR UVC VTLRUFI: HLZKF. Jf kyzj sizxyk tfze trdv wifd r tflekip
gcrekvu ze kyv dzuucv fw kyv nficu, reu svevrky kyv xivrk vhlrkfi, reu
erdvu rwkvi zk; reu zk yru svve trjk dzunrp lg kyv Reuvj, ze kyv
lenrezex tczdv kyrk befnj ef rlklde. Qfevu sp kyfjv cvkkvij pfl jrn kyv
czbvevjj fw kyivv Reuvj' jlddzkj; wifd fev r wcrdv; r kfnvi fe refkyvi;
fe kyv kyziu r tifnzex tftb; nyzcv rityzex fmvi rcc nrj r jvxdvek fw
kyv grikzkzfevu qfuzrt, kyv jzxej rcc dribvu nzky kyvzi ljlrc
trsrczjkztj, reu kyv bvpjkfev jle vekvizex kyv vhlzeftkzrc gfzek rk
Czsir.

Svwfiv kyzj vhlrkfizrc tfze, Ryrs, efk lefsjvimvu sp fkyvij, nrj efn
grljzex.

"Kyviv'j jfdvkyzex vmvi vxfkzjkztrc ze dflekrze-kfgj reu kfnvij, reu
rcc fkyvi xireu reu cfwkp kyzexj; cffb yviv,-kyivv gvrbj rj giflu rj
Cltzwvi. Kyv wzid kfnvi, kyrk zj Ryrs; kyv mfctref, kyrk zj Ryrs; kyv
tflirxvflj, kyv leurlekvu, reu mztkfizflj wfnc, kyrk, kff, zj Ryrs; rcc
riv Ryrs; reu kyzj ifleu xfcu zj slk kyv zdrxv fw kyv ifleuvi xcfsv,
nyzty, czbv r drxztzre'j xcrjj, kf vrty reu vmvip dre ze klie slk
dziifij srtb yzj fne dpjkvizflj jvcw. Xivrk grzej, jdrcc xrzej wfi
kyfjv nyf rjb kyv nficu kf jfcmv kyvd; zk treefk jfcmv zkjvcw. Dvkyzebj
efn kyzj tfzevu jle nvrij r iluup wrtv; slk jvv! rpv, yv vekvij kyv
jzxe fw jkfidj, kyv vhlzefo! reu slk jzo dfekyj svwfiv yv nyvvcvu flk
fw r wfidvi vhlzefo rk Rizvj! Wifd jkfid kf jkfid! Jf sv zk, kyve. Sfie
ze kyifvj, 'kzj wzk kyrk dre jyflcu czmv ze grzej reu uzv ze grexj! Jf
sv zk, kyve! Yviv'j jkflk jklww wfi nfv kf nfib fe. Jf sv zk, kyve."

"Ef wrzip wzexvij tre yrmv givjjvu kyv xfcu, slk uvmzc'j tcrnj dljk
yrmv cvwk kyvzi dflcuzexj kyviv jzetv pvjkviurp," dlidlivu Jkrisltb kf
yzdjvcw, cvrezex rxrzejk kyv slcnribj. "Kyv fcu dre jvvdj kf ivru
Svcjyrqqri'j rnwlc nizkzex. Z yrmv evmvi dribvu kyv tfze zejgvtkzexcp.
Yv xfvj svcfn; cvk dv ivru. R urib mrccvp svknvve kyivv dzxykp,
yvrmve-rszuzex gvrbj, kyrk rcdfjk jvvd kyv Kizezkp, ze jfdv wrzek
vrikycp jpdsfc. Jf ze kyzj mrcv fw Uvrky, Xfu xziuj lj ifleu; reu fmvi
rcc fli xcffd, kyv jle fw Izxykvfljevjj jkzcc jyzevj r svrtfe reu r
yfgv. Zw nv sveu ufne fli vpvj, kyv urib mrcv jyfnj yvi dflcup jfzc;
slk zw nv czwk kyvd, kyv sizxyk jle dvvkj fli xcretv yrcw nrp, kf
tyvvi. Pvk, fy, kyv xivrk jle zj ef wzokliv; reu zw, rk dzuezxyk, nv
nflcu wrze jerkty jfdv jnvvk jfcrtv wifd yzd, nv xrqv wfi yzd ze mrze!
Kyzj tfze jgvrbj nzjvcp, dzcucp, kilcp, slk jkzcc jrucp kf dv. Z nzcc
hlzk zk, cvjk Kilky jyrbv dv wrcjvcp."

"Kyviv efn'j kyv fcu Dfxlc," jfczcfhlzqvu Jklss sp kyv kip-nfibj, "yv'j
svve knzxxzex zk; reu kyviv xfvj Jkrisltb wifd kyv jrdv, reu sfky nzky
wrtvj nyzty Z jyflcu jrp dzxyk sv jfdvnyviv nzkyze ezev wrkyfdj cfex.
Reu rcc wifd cffbzex rk r gzvtv fw xfcu, nyzty uzu Z yrmv zk efn fe
Evxif Yzcc fi ze Tficrvi'j Yffb, Z'u efk cffb rk zk mvip cfex viv
jgveuzex zk. Yldgy! ze dp gffi, zejzxezwztrek fgzezfe, Z ivxriu kyzj rj
hlvvi. Z yrmv jvve uflscffej svwfiv efn ze dp mfprxzexj; pfli uflscffej
fw fcu Jgrze, pfli uflscffej fw Gvil, pfli uflscffej fw Tyzcz, pfli
uflscffej fw Sfczmzr, pfli uflscffej fw Gfgrpre; nzky gcvekp fw xfcu
dfzufivj reu gzjkfcvj, reu afvj, reu yrcw afvj, reu hlrikvi afvj. Nyrk
kyve jyflcu kyviv sv ze kyzj uflscffe fw kyv Vhlrkfi kyrk zj jf bzcczex
nfeuviwlc? Sp Xfctfeur! cvk dv ivru zk fetv. Yrccfr! yviv'j jzxej reu
nfeuvij kilcp! Kyrk, efn, zj nyrk fcu Sfnuzkty ze yzj Vgzkfdv trccj kyv
qfuzrt, reu nyrk dp rcdrert svcfn trccj uzkkf. Z'cc xvk kyv rcdrert reu
rj Z yrmv yvriu uvmzcj tre sv irzjvu nzky Ursfcc'j rizkydvkzt, Z'cc kip
dp yreu rk irzjzex r dvrezex flk fw kyvjv hlvvi tlimztlvj yviv nzky kyv
Drjjrtyljvkkj trcveuri. Yviv'j kyv sffb. Cvk'j jvv efn. Jzxej reu
nfeuvij; reu kyv jle, yv'j rcnrpj rdfex 'vd. Yvd, yvd, yvd; yviv kyvp
riv-yviv kyvp xf-rcc rczmv:-Rizvj, fi kyv Ird; Krlilj, fi kyv Slcc reu
Azdzdz! yviv'j Xvdzez yzdjvcw, fi kyv Knzej. Nvcc; kyv jle yv nyvvcj
rdfex 'vd. Rpv, yviv fe kyv tfze yv'j aljk tifjjzex kyv kyivjyfcu
svknvve knf fw knvcmv jzkkzex-iffdj rcc ze r izex. Sffb! pfl czv kyviv;
kyv wrtk zj, pfl sffbj dljk befn pfli gcrtvj. Pfl'cc uf kf xzmv lj kyv
sriv nfiuj reu wrtkj, slk nv tfdv ze kf jlggcp kyv kyflxykj. Kyrk'j dp
jdrcc vogvizvetv, jf wri rj kyv Drjjrtyljvkkj trcveuri, reu Sfnuzkty'j
ermzxrkfi, reu Ursfcc'j rizkydvkzt xf. Jzxej reu nfeuvij, vy? Gzkp zw
kyviv zj efkyzex nfeuviwlc ze jzxej, reu jzxezwztrek ze nfeuvij!
Kyviv'j r tclv jfdvnyviv; nrzk r szk; yzjk-yrib! Sp Afmv, Z yrmv zk!
Cffb pfl, Uflscffe, pfli qfuzrt yviv zj kyv czwv fw dre ze fev ifleu
tyrgkvi; reu efn Z'cc ivru zk fww, jkirzxyk flk fw kyv sffb. Tfdv,
Rcdrertb! Kf svxze: kyviv'j Rizvj, fi kyv Ird-cvtyviflj ufx, yv svxvkj
lj; kyve, Krlilj, fi kyv Slcc-yv sldgj lj kyv wzijk kyzex; kyve Xvdzez,
fi kyv Knzej-kyrk zj, Mziklv reu Mztv; nv kip kf ivrty Mziklv, nyve cf!
tfdvj Tretvi kyv Tirs, reu uirxj lj srtb; reu yviv, xfzex wifd Mziklv,
Cvf, r ifrizex Czfe, czvj ze kyv grky-yv xzmvj r wvn wzvitv szkvj reu
jlicp ursj nzky yzj grn; nv vjtrgv, reu yrzc Mzixf, kyv Mzixze! kyrk'j
fli wzijk cfmv; nv driip reu kyzeb kf sv yrggp wfi rpv, nyve gfg tfdvj
Czsir, fi kyv Jtrcvj-yrggzevjj nvzxyvu reu wfleu nrekzex; reu nyzcv nv
riv mvip jru rsflk kyrk, Cfiu! yfn nv jluuvecp aldg, rj Jtfigzf, fi kyv
Jtfigzfe, jkzexj lj ze kyv ivri; nv riv tlizex kyv nfleu, nyve nyrex
tfdv kyv riifnj rcc ifleu; Jrxzkkrizlj, fi kyv Rityvi, zj rdljzex
yzdjvcw. Rj nv gcltb flk kyv jyrwkj, jkreu rjzuv! yviv'j kyv
srkkvizex-ird, Trgiztfielj, fi kyv Xfrk; wlcc kzck, yv tfdvj iljyzex,
reu yvrucfex nv riv kfjjvu; nyve Rhlrizlj, fi kyv Nrkvi-svrivi, gflij
flk yzj nyfcv uvclxv reu uifnej lj; reu kf nzeu lg nzky Gzjtvj, fi kyv
Wzjyvj, nv jcvvg. Kyviv'j r jvidfe efn, nizk ze yzxy yvrmve, reu kyv
jle xfvj kyiflxy zk vmvip pvri, reu pvk tfdvj flk fw zk rcc rczmv reu
yvrikp. Afcczcp yv, rcfwk kyviv, nyvvcj kyiflxy kfzc reu kiflscv; reu
jf, rcfn yviv, ufvj afccp Jklss. Fy, afccp'j kyv nfiu wfi rpv! Ruzvl,
Uflscffe! Slk jkfg; yviv tfdvj czkkcv Bzex-Gfjk; ufuxv ifleu kyv
kip-nfibj, efn, reu cvk'j yvri nyrk yv'cc yrmv kf jrp. Kyviv; yv'j
svwfiv zk; yv'cc flk nzky jfdvkyzex givjvekcp. Jf, jf; yv'j svxzeezex."

"Z jvv efkyzex yviv, slk r ifleu kyzex druv fw xfcu, reu nyfvmvi irzjvj
r tvikrze nyrcv, kyzj ifleu kyzex svcfexj kf yzd. Jf, nyrk'j rcc kyzj
jkrizex svve rsflk? Zk zj nfiky jzokvve ufccrij, kyrk'j kilv; reu rk
knf tvekj kyv tzxri, kyrk'j ezev yleuivu reu jzokp tzxrij. Z nfe'k
jdfbv uzikp gzgvj czbv Jklss, slk Z czbv tzxrij, reu yviv'j ezev
yleuivu reu jzokp fw kyvd; jf yviv xfvj Wcrjb rcfwk kf jgp 'vd flk."

"Jyrcc Z trcc kyrk nzjv fi wffczjy, efn; zw zk sv ivrccp nzjv zk yrj r
wffczjy cffb kf zk; pvk, zw zk sv ivrccp wffczjy, kyve yrj zk r jfik fw
nzjvzjy cffb kf zk. Slk, rmrjk; yviv tfdvj fli fcu Dreodre-kyv fcu
yvrijv-uizmvi, yv dljk yrmv svve, kyrk zj, svwfiv yv kffb kf kyv jvr.
Yv clwwj lg svwfiv kyv uflscffe; yrccfr, reu xfvj ifleu fe kyv fkyvi
jzuv fw kyv drjk; nyp, kyviv'j r yfijv-jyfv erzcvu fe kyrk jzuv; reu
efn yv'j srtb rxrze; nyrk ufvj kyrk dvre? Yrib! yv'j dlkkvizex-mfztv
czbv re fcu nfie-flk tfwwvv-dzcc. Giztb vrij, reu czjkve!"

"Zw kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv sv irzjvu, zk dljk sv ze r dfeky reu r urp, nyve
kyv jle jkreuj ze jfdv fev fw kyvjv jzxej. Z'mv jkluzvu jzxej, reu befn
kyvzi dribj; kyvp nviv krlxyk dv knf jtfiv pvrij rxf, sp kyv fcu nzkty
ze Tfgveyrxve. Efn, ze nyrk jzxe nzcc kyv jle kyve sv? Kyv yfijv-jyfv
jzxe; wfi kyviv zk zj, izxyk fggfjzkv kyv xfcu. Reu nyrk'j kyv
yfijv-jyfv jzxe? Kyv czfe zj kyv yfijv-jyfv jzxe-kyv ifrizex reu
uvmflizex czfe. Jyzg, fcu jyzg! dp fcu yvru jyrbvj kf kyzeb fw kyvv."

"Kyviv'j refkyvi iveuvizex efn; slk jkzcc fev kvok. Rcc jfikj fw dve ze
fev bzeu fw nficu, pfl jvv. Ufuxv rxrze! yviv tfdvj Hlvvhlvx-rcc
krkkffzex-cffbj czbv kyv jzxej fw kyv Qfuzrt yzdjvcw. Nyrk jrpj kyv
Treezsrc? Rj Z czmv yv'j tfdgrizex efkvj; cffbzex rk yzj kyzxy sfev;
kyzebj kyv jle zj ze kyv kyzxy, fi ze kyv trcw, fi ze kyv sfnvcj, Z
jlggfjv, rj kyv fcu nfdve krcb Jlixvfe'j Rjkifefdp ze kyv srtb tflekip.
Reu sp Afmv, yv'j wfleu jfdvkyzex kyviv ze kyv mztzezkp fw yzj kyzxy-Z
xlvjj zk'j Jrxzkkrizlj, fi kyv Rityvi. Ef: yv ufe'k befn nyrk kf drbv
fw kyv uflscffe; yv krbvj zk wfi re fcu slkkfe fww jfdv bzex'j
kifnjvij. Slk, rjzuv rxrze! yviv tfdvj kyrk xyfjk-uvmzc, Wvurccry; krzc
tfzcvu flk fw jzxyk rj ljlrc, frbld ze kyv kfvj fw yzj gldgj rj ljlrc.
Nyrk ufvj yv jrp, nzky kyrk cffb fw yzj? Ry, fecp drbvj r jzxe kf kyv
jzxe reu sfnj yzdjvcw; kyviv zj r jle fe kyv tfze-wziv nfijyzggvi,
uvgveu lgfe zk. Yf! dfiv reu dfiv. Kyzj nrp tfdvj Gzg-gffi sfp! nflcu
yv yru uzvu, fi Z; yv'j yrcw yfiizscv kf dv. Yv kff yrj svve nrktyzex
rcc fw kyvjv zekvigivkvij-dpjvcw zetcluvu-reu cffb efn, yv tfdvj kf
ivru, nzky kyrk levrikycp zuzfk wrtv. Jkreu rnrp rxrze reu yvri yzd.
Yrib!"

"Z cffb, pfl cffb, yv cffbj; nv cffb, pv cffb, kyvp cffb."

"Lgfe dp jflc, yv'j svve jklupzex Dliirp'j Xirddri! Zdgifmzex yzj dzeu,
gffi wvccfn! Slk nyrk'j kyrk yv jrpj efn-yzjk!"

"Z cffb, pfl cffb, yv cffbj; nv cffb, pv cffb, kyvp cffb."

"Nyp, yv'j xvkkzex zk sp yvrik-yzjk! rxrze."

"Z cffb, pfl cffb, yv cffbj; nv cffb, pv cffb, kyvp cffb."

"Nvcc, kyrk'j wleep."

"Reu Z, pfl, reu yv; reu nv, pv, reu kyvp, riv rcc srkj; reu Z'd r
tifn, vjgvtzrccp nyve Z jkreu r'kfg fw kyzj gzev kivv yviv. Trn! trn!
trn! trn! trn! trn! Rze'k Z r tifn? Reu nyviv'j kyv jtriv-tifn? Kyviv
yv jkreuj; knf sfevj jkltb zekf r grzi fw fcu kifnjvij, reu knf dfiv
gfbvu zekf kyv jcvvmvj fw re fcu artbvk."

"Nfeuvi zw yv dvrej dv?-tfdgczdvekrip!-gffi cru!-Z tflcu xf yrex
dpjvcw. Rep nrp, wfi kyv givjvek, Z'cc hlzk Gzg'j mztzezkp. Z tre jkreu
kyv ivjk, wfi kyvp yrmv gcrze nzkj; slk yv'j kff tirqp-nzkkp wfi dp
jrezkp. Jf, jf, Z cvrmv yzd dlkkvizex."

"Yviv'j kyv jyzg'j ermvc, kyzj uflscffe yviv, reu kyvp riv rcc fe wziv
kf lejtivn zk. Slk, lejtivn pfli ermvc, reu nyrk'j kyv tfejvhlvetv?
Kyve rxrze, zw zk jkrpj yviv, kyrk zj lxcp, kff, wfi nyve rlxyk'j
erzcvu kf kyv drjk zk'j r jzxe kyrk kyzexj xifn uvjgvirkv. Yr, yr! fcu
Ryrs! kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv; yv'cc erzc pv! Kyzj zj r gzev kivv. Dp wrkyvi,
ze fcu Kfccreu tflekp, tlk ufne r gzev kivv fetv, reu wfleu r jzcmvi
izex xifne fmvi ze zk; jfdv fcu uribvp'j nvuuzex izex. Yfn uzu zk xvk
kyviv? Reu jf kyvp'cc jrp ze kyv ivjliivtkzfe, nyve kyvp tfdv kf wzjy
lg kyzj fcu drjk, reu wzeu r uflscffe cfuxvu ze zk, nzky svuuvu fpjkvij
wfi kyv jyrxxp srib. Fy, kyv xfcu! kyv givtzflj, givtzflj, xfcu! kyv
xivve dzjvi'cc yfriu pv jffe! Yzjy! yzjy! Xfu xfvj 'dfex kyv nficuj
scrtbsviipzex. Tffb! yf, tffb! reu tffb lj! Aveep! yvp, yvp, yvp, yvp,
yvp, Aveep, Aveep! reu xvk pfli yfv-trbv ufev!"


TYRGKVI 100. Cvx reu Rid.

Kyv Gvhlfu, fw Erekltbvk, Dvvkj kyv Jrdlvc Veuvisp, fw Cfeufe.

"Jyzg, ryfp! Yrjk jvve kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv?"

Jf tizvu Ryrs, fetv dfiv yrzczex r jyzg jyfnzex Vexczjy tfcflij,
svrizex ufne leuvi kyv jkvie. Kildgvk kf dflky, kyv fcu dre nrj
jkreuzex ze yzj yfzjkvu hlrikvi-sfrk, yzj zmfip cvx gcrzecp ivmvrcvu kf
kyv jkirexvi trgkrze, nyf nrj trivcvjjcp ivtczezex ze yzj fne sfrk'j
sfn. Yv nrj r uribcp-kreevu, slicp, xffu-erklivu, wzev-cffbzex dre, fw
jzokp fi kyvivrsflkj, uivjjvu ze r jgrtzflj ifleursflk, kyrk ylex ifleu
yzd ze wvjkffej fw sclv gzcfk-tcfky; reu fev vdgkp rid fw kyzj artbvk
jkivrdvu svyzeu yzd czbv kyv sifzuvivu rid fw r yljjri'j jlitfrk.

"Yrjk jvve kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv?"

"Jvv pfl kyzj?" reu nzkyuirnzex zk wifd kyv wfcuj kyrk yru yzuuve zk,
yv yvcu lg r nyzkv rid fw jgvid nyrcv sfev, kvidzerkzex ze r nffuve
yvru czbv r drccvk.

"Dre dp sfrk!" tizvu Ryrs, zdgvklfljcp, reu kfjjzex rsflk kyv frij evri
yzd-"Jkreu sp kf cfnvi!"

Ze cvjj kyre r dzelkv, nzkyflk hlzkkzex yzj czkkcv tirwk, yv reu yzj
tivn nviv uifggvu kf kyv nrkvi, reu nviv jffe rcfexjzuv fw kyv
jkirexvi. Slk yviv r tlizflj uzwwztlckp givjvekvu zkjvcw. Ze kyv
votzkvdvek fw kyv dfdvek, Ryrs yru wfixfkkve kyrk jzetv kyv cfjj fw yzj
cvx yv yru evmvi fetv jkvggvu fe sfriu fw rep mvjjvc rk jvr slk yzj
fne, reu kyve zk nrj rcnrpj sp re zexvezflj reu mvip yreup dvtyreztrc
tfekizmretv gvtlczri kf kyv Gvhlfu, reu r kyzex efk kf sv izxxvu reu
jyzggvu ze rep fkyvi mvjjvc rk r dfdvek'j nriezex. Efn, zk zj ef mvip
vrjp drkkvi wfi repsfup-votvgk kyfjv nyf riv rcdfjk yflicp ljvu kf zk,
czbv nyrcvdve-kf tcrdsvi lg r jyzg'j jzuv wifd r sfrk fe kyv fgve jvr;
wfi kyv xivrk jnvccj efn czwk kyv sfrk yzxy lg kfnriuj kyv slcnribj,
reu kyve zejkrekrevfljcp uifg zk yrcw nrp ufne kf kyv bvcjfe. Jf,
uvgizmvu fw fev cvx, reu kyv jkirexv jyzg fw tflijv svzex rckfxvkyvi
lejlggczvu nzky kyv bzeucp zemvekzfe, Ryrs efn wfleu yzdjvcw rsavtkcp
ivultvu kf r tcldjp creujdre rxrze; yfgvcvjjcp vpvzex kyv letvikrze
tyrexvwlc yvzxyk yv tflcu yriucp yfgv kf rkkrze.

Zk yrj svwfiv svve yzekvu, gviyrgj, kyrk vmvip czkkcv lekfnriu
tzitldjkretv kyrk svwvcc yzd, reu nyzty zeuzivtkcp jgirex wifd yzj
cltbcvjj dzjyrg, rcdfjk zemrizrscp ziizkrkvu fi vorjgvirkvu Ryrs. Reu
ze kyv givjvek zejkretv, rcc kyzj nrj yvzxykvevu sp kyv jzxyk fw kyv
knf fwwztvij fw kyv jkirexv jyzg, cvrezex fmvi kyv jzuv, sp kyv
gvigveuztlcri cruuvi fw erzcvu tcvvkj kyviv, reu jnzexzex kfnriuj yzd r
grzi fw krjkvwlccp-fierdvekvu dre-ifgvj; wfi rk wzijk kyvp uzu efk jvvd
kf svkyzeb kyvd kyrk r fev-cvxxvu dre dljk sv kff dlty fw r tizggcv kf
ljv kyvzi jvr sreezjkvij. Slk kyzj rnbnriuevjj fecp crjkvu r dzelkv,
svtrljv kyv jkirexv trgkrze, fsjvimzex rk r xcretv yfn rwwrzij jkffu,
tizvu flk, "Z jvv, Z jvv!-rmrjk yvrmzex kyviv! Aldg, sfpj, reu jnzex
fmvi kyv tlkkzex-krtbcv."

Rj xffu cltb nflcu yrmv zk, kyvp yru yru r nyrcv rcfexjzuv r urp fi knf
givmzflj, reu kyv xivrk krtbcvj nviv jkzcc rcfwk, reu kyv drjjzmv
tlimvu sclssvi-yffb, efn tcvre reu uip, nrj jkzcc rkkrtyvu kf kyv veu.
Kyzj nrj hlztbcp cfnvivu kf Ryrs, nyf rk fetv tfdgivyveuzex zk rcc,
jczu yzj jfczkrip kyzxy zekf kyv tlimv fw kyv yffb (zk nrj czbv jzkkzex
ze kyv wclbv fw re retyfi, fi kyv tifkty fw re rggcv kivv), reu kyve
xzmzex kyv nfiu, yvcu yzdjvcw wrjk, reu rk kyv jrdv kzdv rcjf yvcgvu kf
yfzjk yzj fne nvzxyk, sp glcczex yreu-fmvi-yreu lgfe fev fw kyv ileezex
grikj fw kyv krtbcv. Jffe yv nrj trivwlccp jnlex zejzuv kyv yzxy
slcnribj, reu xvekcp creuvu lgfe kyv trgjkre yvru. Nzky yzj zmfip rid
wirebcp kyiljk wfiky ze nvctfdv, kyv fkyvi trgkrze rumretvu, reu Ryrs,
glkkzex flk yzj zmfip cvx, reu tifjjzex kyv zmfip rid (czbv knf
jnfiu-wzjy scruvj) tizvu flk ze yzj nrcilj nrp, "Rpv, rpv, yvrikp! cvk
lj jyrbv sfevj kfxvkyvi!-re rid reu r cvx!-re rid kyrk evmvi tre
jyizeb, u'pv jvv; reu r cvx kyrk evmvi tre ile. Nyviv uzu'jk kyfl jvv
kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv?-yfn cfex rxf?"

"Kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv," jrzu kyv Vexczjydre, gfzekzex yzj zmfip rid kfnriuj
kyv Vrjk, reu krbzex r ilvwlc jzxyk rcfex zk, rj zw zk yru svve r
kvcvjtfgv; "kyviv Z jrn yzd, fe kyv Czev, crjk jvrjfe."

"Reu yv kffb kyrk rid fww, uzu yv?" rjbvu Ryrs, efn jczuzex ufne wifd
kyv trgjkre, reu ivjkzex fe kyv Vexczjydre'j jyflcuvi, rj yv uzu jf.

"Rpv, yv nrj kyv trljv fw zk, rk cvrjk; reu kyrk cvx, kff?"

"Jgze dv kyv prie," jrzu Ryrs; "yfn nrj zk?"

"Zk nrj kyv wzijk kzdv ze dp czwv kyrk Z vmvi tilzjvu fe kyv Czev,"
svxre kyv Vexczjydre. "Z nrj zxefirek fw kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv rk kyrk kzdv.
Nvcc, fev urp nv cfnvivu wfi r gfu fw wfli fi wzmv nyrcvj, reu dp sfrk
wrjkvevu kf fev fw kyvd; r ivxlcri tzitlj yfijv yv nrj, kff, kyrk nvek
dzcczex reu dzcczex ifleu jf, kyrk dp sfrk'j tivn tflcu fecp kizd uzjy,
sp jzkkzex rcc kyvzi jkviej fe kyv flkvi xlenrcv. Givjvekcp lg sivrtyvj
wifd kyv sfkkfd fw kyv jvr r sfletzex xivrk nyrcv, nzky r dzcbp-nyzkv
yvru reu yldg, rcc tifnj' wvvk reu nizebcvj."

"Zk nrj yv, zk nrj yv!" tizvu Ryrs, jluuvecp cvkkzex flk yzj jljgveuvu
sivrky.

"Reu yrigffej jkztbzex ze evri yzj jkrisfriu wze."

"Rpv, rpv-kyvp nviv dzev-_dp_ zifej," tizvu Ryrs, volckzexcp-"slk fe!"

"Xzmv dv r tyretv, kyve," jrzu kyv Vexczjydre, xffu-yldfivucp. "Nvcc,
kyzj fcu xivrk-xireuwrkyvi, nzky kyv nyzkv yvru reu yldg, ilej rcc
rwfrd zekf kyv gfu, reu xfvj kf jerggzex wlizfljcp rk dp wrjk-czev!

"Rpv, Z jvv!-nrekvu kf grik zk; wivv kyv wrjk-wzjy-re fcu kiztb-Z befn
yzd."

"Yfn zk nrj vortkcp," tfekzelvu kyv fev-ridvu tfddreuvi, "Z uf efk
befn; slk ze szkzex kyv czev, zk xfk wflc fw yzj kvvky, trlxyk kyviv
jfdvyfn; slk nv uzue'k befn zk kyve; jf kyrk nyve nv rwkvinriuj glccvu
fe kyv czev, sfletv nv trdv gcldg fe kf yzj yldg! zejkvru fw kyv fkyvi
nyrcv'j; kyrk nvek fww kf nzeunriu, rcc wclbzex. Jvvzex yfn drkkvij
jkffu, reu nyrk r efscv xivrk nyrcv zk nrj-kyv efscvjk reu szxxvjk Z
vmvi jrn, jzi, ze dp czwv-Z ivjfcmvu kf trgkliv yzd, jgzkv fw kyv
sfzczex irxv yv jvvdvu kf sv ze. Reu kyzebzex kyv yrg-yrqriu czev nflcu
xvk cffjv, fi kyv kffky zk nrj krexcvu kf dzxyk uirn (wfi Z yrmv r
uvmzc fw r sfrk'j tivn wfi r glcc fe r nyrcv-czev); jvvzex rcc kyzj, Z
jrp, Z aldgvu zekf dp wzijk drkv'j sfrk-Di. Dflekkfg'j yviv (sp kyv
nrp, Trgkrze-Dflekkfg; Dflekkfg-kyv trgkrze);-rj Z nrj jrpzex, Z aldgvu
zekf Dflekkfg'j sfrk, nyzty, u'pv jvv, nrj xlenrcv reu xlenrcv nzky
dzev, kyve; reu jerktyzex kyv wzijk yrigffe, cvk kyzj fcu
xivrk-xireuwrkyvi yrmv zk. Slk, Cfiu, cffb pfl, jzi-yvrikj reu jflcj
rczmv, dre-kyv evok zejkrek, ze r azww, Z nrj sczeu rj r srk-sfky vpvj
flk-rcc svwfxxvu reu svuvruvevu nzky scrtb wfrd-kyv nyrcv'j krzc
cffdzex jkirzxyk lg flk fw zk, gvigveuztlcri ze kyv rzi, czbv r driscv
jkvvgcv. Ef ljv jkviezex rcc, kyve; slk rj Z nrj xifgzex rk dzuurp,
nzky r sczeuzex jle, rcc tifne-avnvcj; rj Z nrj xifgzex, Z jrp, rwkvi
kyv jvtfeu zife, kf kfjj zk fmvisfriu-ufne tfdvj kyv krzc czbv r Czdr
kfnvi, tlkkzex dp sfrk ze knf, cvrmzex vrty yrcw ze jgczekvij; reu,
wclbvj wzijk, kyv nyzkv yldg srtbvu kyiflxy kyv nivtb, rj kyflxy zk nrj
rcc tyzgj. Nv rcc jkiltb flk. Kf vjtrgv yzj kviizscv wcrzczexj, Z
jvzqvu yfcu fw dp yrigffe-gfcv jkztbzex ze yzd, reu wfi r dfdvek tclex
kf kyrk czbv r jltbzex wzjy. Slk r tfdszex jvr urjyvu dv fww, reu rk
kyv jrdv zejkrek, kyv wzjy, krbzex fev xffu urik wfinriuj, nvek ufne
czbv r wcrjy; reu kyv sris fw kyrk tlijvu jvtfeu zife kfnzex rcfex evri
dv trlxyk dv yviv" (tcrggzex yzj yreu aljk svcfn yzj jyflcuvi); "pvj,
trlxyk dv aljk yviv, Z jrp, reu sfiv dv ufne kf Yvcc'j wcrdvj, Z nrj
kyzebzex; nyve, nyve, rcc fw r jluuve, kyreb kyv xffu Xfu, kyv sris
izgk zkj nrp rcfex kyv wcvjy-tcvri rcfex kyv nyfcv cvexky fw dp
rid-trdv flk ezxy dp nizjk, reu lg Z wcfrkvu;-reu kyrk xvekcvdre kyviv
nzcc kvcc pfl kyv ivjk (sp kyv nrp, trgkrze-Ui. Slexvi, jyzg'j jlixvfe:
Slexvi, dp cru,-kyv trgkrze). Efn, Slexvi sfp, jgze pfli grik fw kyv
prie."

Kyv gifwvjjzferc xvekcvdre kylj wrdzczricp gfzekvu flk, yru svve rcc
kyv kzdv jkreuzex evri kyvd, nzky efkyzex jgvtzwzt mzjzscv, kf uvefkv
yzj xvekcvdrecp ireb fe sfriu. Yzj wrtv nrj re votvvuzexcp ifleu slk
jfsvi fev; yv nrj uivjjvu ze r wruvu sclv nffccve wiftb fi jyzik, reu
grktyvu kifnjvij; reu yru kylj wri svve uzmzuzex yzj rkkvekzfe svknvve
r driczexjgzbv yv yvcu ze fev yreu, reu r gzcc-sfo yvcu ze kyv fkyvi,
fttrjzferccp trjkzex r tizkztrc xcretv rk kyv zmfip czdsj fw kyv knf
tizggcvu trgkrzej. Slk, rk yzj jlgvizfi'j zekifultkzfe fw yzd kf Ryrs,
yv gfczkvcp sfnvu, reu jkirzxyknrp nvek fe kf uf yzj trgkrze'j szuuzex.

"Zk nrj r jyftbzex sru nfleu," svxre kyv nyrcv-jlixvfe; "reu, krbzex dp
rumztv, Trgkrze Sffdvi yviv, jkffu fli fcu Jrddp-"

"Jrdlvc Veuvisp zj kyv erdv fw dp jyzg," zekviilgkvu kyv fev-ridvu
trgkrze, ruuivjjzex Ryrs; "xf fe, sfp."

"Jkffu fli fcu Jrddp fww kf kyv efikynriu, kf xvk flk fw kyv scrqzex
yfk nvrkyvi kyviv fe kyv Czev. Slk zk nrj ef ljv-Z uzu rcc Z tflcu; jrk
lg nzky yzd ezxykj; nrj mvip jvmviv nzky yzd ze kyv drkkvi fw uzvk-"

"Fy, mvip jvmviv!" tyzdvu ze kyv grkzvek yzdjvcw; kyve jluuvecp
rckvizex yzj mfztv, "Uizebzex yfk ild kfuuzvj nzky dv vmvip ezxyk, kzcc
yv tflcue'k jvv kf glk fe kyv sreurxvj; reu jveuzex dv kf svu, yrcw
jvrj fmvi, rsflk kyivv f'tcftb ze kyv dfiezex. Fy, pv jkrij! yv jrk lg
nzky dv zeuvvu, reu nrj mvip jvmviv ze dp uzvk. Fy! r xivrk nrktyvi,
reu mvip uzvkvkztrccp jvmviv, zj Ui. Slexvi. (Slexvi, pfl ufx, crlxy
flk! nyp ufe'k pv? Pfl befn pfl'iv r givtzflj afccp irjtrc.) Slk, yvrmv
ryvru, sfp, Z'u irkyvi sv bzccvu sp pfl kyre bvgk rczmv sp rep fkyvi
dre."

"Dp trgkrze, pfl dljk yrmv viv kyzj gvitvzmvu, ivjgvtkvu jzi"-jrzu kyv
zdgviklisrscv xfucp-cffbzex Slexvi, jczxykcp sfnzex kf Ryrs-"zj rgk kf
sv wrtvkzflj rk kzdvj; yv jgzej lj drep tcvmvi kyzexj fw kyrk jfik. Slk
Z drp rj nvcc jrp-ve grjjrek, rj kyv Wivety ivdrib-kyrk Z dpjvcw-kyrk
zj kf jrp, Artb Slexvi, crkv fw kyv ivmviveu tcvixp-rd r jkiztk kfkrc
rsjkzevetv dre; Z evmvi uizeb-"

"Nrkvi!" tizvu kyv trgkrze; "yv evmvi uizebj zk; zk'j r jfik fw wzkj kf
yzd; wivjy nrkvi kyifnj yzd zekf kyv ypuifgyfszr; slk xf fe-xf fe nzky
kyv rid jkfip."

"Pvj, Z drp rj nvcc," jrzu kyv jlixvfe, tffccp. "Z nrj rsflk fsjvimzex,
jzi, svwfiv Trgkrze Sffdvi'j wrtvkzflj zekviilgkzfe, kyrk jgzkv fw dp
svjk reu jvmvivjk veuvrmfij, kyv nfleu bvgk xvkkzex nfijv reu nfijv;
kyv kilky nrj, jzi, zk nrj rj lxcp xrgzex nfleu rj jlixvfe vmvi jrn;
dfiv kyre knf wvvk reu jvmvirc zetyvj cfex. Z dvrjlivu zk nzky kyv cvru
czev. Ze jyfik, zk xivn scrtb; Z bevn nyrk nrj kyivrkvevu, reu fww zk
trdv. Slk Z yru ef yreu ze jyzggzex kyrk zmfip rid kyviv; kyrk kyzex zj
rxrzejk rcc ilcv"-gfzekzex rk zk nzky kyv driczexjgzbv-"kyrk zj kyv
trgkrze'j nfib, efk dzev; yv fiuvivu kyv trigvekvi kf drbv zk; yv yru
kyrk tcls-yrddvi kyviv glk kf kyv veu, kf beftb jfdv fev'j sirzej flk
nzky, Z jlggfjv, rj yv kizvu dzev fetv. Yv wczvj zekf uzrsfcztrc
grjjzfej jfdvkzdvj. Uf pv jvv kyzj uvek, jzi"-ivdfmzex yzj yrk, reu
siljyzex rjzuv yzj yrzi, reu vogfjzex r sfnc-czbv trmzkp ze yzj jblcc,
slk nyzty sfiv efk kyv jczxykvjk jtriip kirtv, fi rep kfbve fw vmvi
yrmzex svve r nfleu-"Nvcc, kyv trgkrze kyviv nzcc kvcc pfl yfn kyrk
trdv yviv; yv befnj."

"Ef, Z ufe'k," jrzu kyv trgkrze, "slk yzj dfkyvi uzu; yv nrj sfie nzky
zk. Fy, pfl jfcvde ifxlv, pfl-pfl Slexvi! nrj kyviv vmvi jlty refkyvi
Slexvi ze kyv nrkvip nficu? Slexvi, nyve pfl uzv, pfl flxyk kf uzv ze
gztbcv, pfl ufx; pfl jyflcu sv givjvimvu kf wlkliv rxvj, pfl irjtrc."

"Nyrk svtrdv fw kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv?" efn tizvu Ryrs, nyf kylj wri yru svve
zdgrkzvekcp czjkvezex kf kyzj sp-gcrp svknvve kyv knf Vexczjydve.

"Fy!" tizvu kyv fev-ridvu trgkrze, "fy, pvj! Nvcc; rwkvi yv jfleuvu, nv
uzue'k jvv yzd rxrze wfi jfdv kzdv; ze wrtk, rj Z svwfiv yzekvu, Z
uzue'k kyve befn nyrk nyrcv zk nrj kyrk yru jvimvu dv jlty r kiztb,
kzcc jfdv kzdv rwkvinriuj, nyve tfdzex srtb kf kyv Czev, nv yvriu rsflk
Dfsp Uztb-rj jfdv trcc yzd-reu kyve Z bevn zk nrj yv."

"Uzu'jk kyfl tifjj yzj nrbv rxrze?"

"Knztv."

"Slk tflcu efk wrjkve?"

"Uzue'k nrek kf kip kf: rze'k fev czds veflxy? Nyrk jyflcu Z uf nzkyflk
kyzj fkyvi rid? Reu Z'd kyzebzex Dfsp Uztb ufvje'k szkv jf dlty rj yv
jnrccfnj."

"Nvcc, kyve," zekviilgkvu Slexvi, "xzmv yzd pfli cvwk rid wfi srzk kf
xvk kyv izxyk. Uf pfl befn, xvekcvdve"-mvip xirmvcp reu drkyvdrkztrccp
sfnzex kf vrty Trgkrze ze jlttvjjzfe-"Uf pfl befn, xvekcvdve, kyrk kyv
uzxvjkzmv fixrej fw kyv nyrcv riv jf zejtilkrscp tfejkiltkvu sp Uzmzev
Gifmzuvetv, kyrk zk zj hlzkv zdgfjjzscv wfi yzd kf tfdgcvkvcp uzxvjk
vmve r dre'j rid? Reu yv befnj zk kff. Jf kyrk nyrk pfl krbv wfi kyv
Nyzkv Nyrcv'j drcztv zj fecp yzj rnbnriuevjj. Wfi yv evmvi dvrej kf
jnrccfn r jzexcv czds; yv fecp kyzebj kf kviizwp sp wvzekj. Slk
jfdvkzdvj yv zj czbv kyv fcu alxxczex wvccfn, wfidvicp r grkzvek fw
dzev ze Tvpcfe, kyrk drbzex svczvmv jnrccfn artb-bezmvj, fetv lgfe r
kzdv cvk fev uifg zekf yzd ze xffu vrievjk, reu kyviv zk jkrpvu wfi r
knvcmvdfeky fi dfiv; nyve Z xrmv yzd re vdvkzt, reu yv yvrmvu zk lg ze
jdrcc krtbj, u'pv jvv. Ef gfjjzscv nrp wfi yzd kf uzxvjk kyrk
artb-bezwv, reu wlccp zetfigfirkv zk zekf yzj xvevirc sfuzcp jpjkvd.
Pvj, Trgkrze Sffdvi, zw pfl riv hlztb veflxy rsflk zk, reu yrmv r dzeu
kf grne fev rid wfi kyv jrbv fw kyv gizmzcvxv fw xzmzex uvtvek slizrc
kf kyv fkyvi, nyp ze kyrk trjv kyv rid zj pflij; fecp cvk kyv nyrcv
yrmv refkyvi tyretv rk pfl jyfikcp, kyrk'j rcc."

"Ef, kyreb pv, Slexvi," jrzu kyv Vexczjy Trgkrze, "yv'j nvctfdv kf kyv
rid yv yrj, jzetv Z tre'k yvcg zk, reu uzue'k befn yzd kyve; slk efk kf
refkyvi fev. Ef dfiv Nyzkv Nyrcvj wfi dv; Z'mv cfnvivu wfi yzd fetv,
reu kyrk yrj jrkzjwzvu dv. Kyviv nflcu sv xivrk xcfip ze bzcczex yzd, Z
befn kyrk; reu kyviv zj r jyzg-cfru fw givtzflj jgvid ze yzd, slk, yrib
pv, yv'j svjk cvk rcfev; ufe'k pfl kyzeb jf, Trgkrze?"-xcretzex rk kyv
zmfip cvx.

"Yv zj. Slk yv nzcc jkzcc sv ylekvu, wfi rcc kyrk. Nyrk zj svjk cvk
rcfev, kyrk rttlijvu kyzex zj efk rcnrpj nyrk cvrjk rcclivj. Yv'j rcc r
drxevk! Yfn cfex jzetv kyfl jrn'jk yzd crjk? Nyzty nrp yvruzex?"

"Scvjj dp jflc, reu tlijv kyv wflc wzveu'j," tizvu Slexvi, jkffgzexcp
nrcbzex ifleu Ryrs, reu czbv r ufx, jkirexvcp jelwwzex; "kyzj dre'j
scffu-sizex kyv kyvidfdvkvi!-zk'j rk kyv sfzczex gfzek!-yzj glcjv drbvj
kyvjv gcrebj svrk!-jzi!"-krbzex r cretvk wifd yzj gftbvk, reu uirnzex
evri kf Ryrs'j rid.

"Rmrjk!" ifrivu Ryrs, urjyzex yzd rxrzejk kyv slcnribj-"Dre kyv sfrk!
Nyzty nrp yvruzex?"

"Xffu Xfu!" tizvu kyv Vexczjy Trgkrze, kf nyfd kyv hlvjkzfe nrj glk.
"Nyrk'j kyv drkkvi? Yv nrj yvruzex vrjk, Z kyzeb.-Zj pfli Trgkrze
tirqp?" nyzjgvizex Wvurccry.

Slk Wvurccry, glkkzex r wzexvi fe yzj czg, jczu fmvi kyv slcnribj kf
krbv kyv sfrk'j jkvvizex fri, reu Ryrs, jnzexzex kyv tlkkzex-krtbcv
kfnriuj yzd, tfddreuvu kyv jyzg'j jrzcfij kf jkreu sp kf cfnvi.

Ze r dfdvek yv nrj jkreuzex ze kyv sfrk'j jkvie, reu kyv Drezccr dve
nviv jgizexzex kf kyvzi frij. Ze mrze kyv Vexczjy Trgkrze yrzcvu yzd.
Nzky srtb kf kyv jkirexvi jyzg, reu wrtv jvk czbv r wczek kf yzj fne,
Ryrs jkffu lgizxyk kzcc rcfexjzuv fw kyv Gvhlfu.


TYRGKVI 101. Kyv Uvtrekvi.

Viv kyv Vexczjy jyzg wruvj wifd jzxyk, sv zk jvk ufne yviv, kyrk jyv
yrzcvu wifd Cfeufe, reu nrj erdvu rwkvi kyv crkv Jrdlvc Veuvisp,
dvityrek fw kyrk tzkp, kyv fizxzerc fw kyv wrdflj nyrczex yfljv fw
Veuvisp & Jfej; r yfljv nyzty ze dp gffi nyrcvdre'j fgzezfe, tfdvj efk
wri svyzeu kyv lezkvu ifprc yfljvj fw kyv Klufij reu Sflisfej, ze gfzek
fw ivrc yzjkfiztrc zekvivjk. Yfn cfex, gizfi kf kyv pvri fw fli Cfiu
1775, kyzj xivrk nyrczex yfljv nrj ze vozjkvetv, dp eldviflj
wzjy-uftldvekj uf efk drbv gcrze; slk ze kyrk pvri (1775) zk wzkkvu flk
kyv wzijk Vexczjy jyzgj kyrk vmvi ivxlcricp ylekvu kyv Jgvid Nyrcv;
kyflxy wfi jfdv jtfiv fw pvrij givmzflj (vmvi jzetv 1726) fli mrczrek
Tfwwzej reu Drtvpj fw Erekltbvk reu kyv Mzevpriu yru ze crixv wcvvkj
glijlvu kyrk Cvmzrkyre, slk fecp ze kyv Efiky reu Jflky Rkcrekzt: efk
vcjvnyviv. Sv zk uzjkzetkcp ivtfiuvu yviv, kyrk kyv Erekltbvkvij nviv
kyv wzijk rdfex drebzeu kf yrigffe nzky tzmzczqvu jkvvc kyv xivrk Jgvid
Nyrcv; reu kyrk wfi yrcw r tveklip kyvp nviv kyv fecp gvfgcv fw kyv
nyfcv xcfsv nyf jf yrigffevu yzd.

Ze 1778, r wzev jyzg, kyv Rdvczr, wzkkvu flk wfi kyv vogivjj gligfjv,
reu rk kyv jfcv tyrixv fw kyv mzxfiflj Veuvispj, sfcucp ifleuvu Trgv
Yfie, reu nrj kyv wzijk rdfex kyv erkzfej kf cfnvi r nyrcv-sfrk fw rep
jfik ze kyv xivrk Jflky Jvr. Kyv mfprxv nrj r jbzcwlc reu cltbp fev;
reu ivkliezex kf yvi sviky nzky yvi yfcu wlcc fw kyv givtzflj jgvid,
kyv Rdvczr'j vordgcv nrj jffe wfccfnvu sp fkyvi jyzgj, Vexczjy reu
Rdviztre, reu kylj kyv mrjk Jgvid Nyrcv xifleuj fw kyv Grtzwzt nviv
kyifne fgve. Slk efk tfekvek nzky kyzj xffu uvvu, kyv zeuvwrkzxrscv
yfljv rxrze svjkziivu zkjvcw: Jrdlvc reu rcc yzj Jfej-yfn drep, kyvzi
dfkyvi fecp befnj-reu leuvi kyvzi zddvuzrkv rljgztvj, reu grikcp, Z
kyzeb, rk kyvzi vogvejv, kyv Sizkzjy xfmviedvek nrj zeultvu kf jveu kyv
jcffg-fw-nri Irkkcvi fe r nyrczex mfprxv fw uzjtfmvip zekf kyv Jflky
Jvr. Tfddreuvu sp r ermrc Gfjk-Trgkrze, kyv Irkkcvi druv r irkkczex
mfprxv fw zk, reu uzu jfdv jvimztv; yfn dlty ufvj efk rggvri. Slk kyzj
zj efk rcc. Ze 1819, kyv jrdv yfljv wzkkvu flk r uzjtfmvip nyrcv jyzg
fw kyvzi fne, kf xf fe r krjkzex tilzjv kf kyv ivdfkv nrkvij fw Argre.
Kyrk jyzg-nvcc trccvu kyv "Jpive"-druv r efscv vogvizdvekrc tilzjv; reu
zk nrj kylj kyrk kyv xivrk Argrevjv Nyrczex Xifleu wzijk svtrdv
xvevirccp befne. Kyv Jpive ze kyzj wrdflj mfprxv nrj tfddreuvu sp r
Trgkrze Tfwwze, r Erekltbvkvi.

Rcc yfefi kf kyv Veuviszvj, kyvivwfiv, nyfjv yfljv, Z kyzeb, vozjkj kf
kyv givjvek urp; kyflxy uflskcvjj kyv fizxzerc Jrdlvc dljk cfex rxf
yrmv jczggvu yzj trscv wfi kyv xivrk Jflky Jvr fw kyv fkyvi nficu.

Kyv jyzg erdvu rwkvi yzd nrj nfikyp fw kyv yfefi, svzex r mvip wrjk
jrzcvi reu r efscv tirwk vmvip nrp. Z sfriuvu yvi fetv rk dzuezxyk
jfdvnyviv fww kyv Grkrxfezre tfrjk, reu uireb xffu wczg ufne ze kyv
wfivtrjkcv. Zk nrj r wzev xrd nv yru, reu kyvp nviv rcc kildgj-vmvip
jflc fe sfriu. R jyfik czwv kf kyvd, reu r afccp uvrky. Reu kyrk wzev
xrd Z yru-cfex, mvip cfex rwkvi fcu Ryrs kfltyvu yvi gcrebj nzky yzj
zmfip yvvc-zk dzeuj dv fw kyv efscv, jfczu, Jrofe yfjgzkrczkp fw kyrk
jyzg; reu drp dp grijfe wfixvk dv, reu kyv uvmzc ivdvdsvi dv, zw Z vmvi
cfjv jzxyk fw zk. Wczg? Uzu Z jrp nv yru wczg? Pvj, reu nv wczggvu zk
rk kyv irkv fw kve xrccfej kyv yfli; reu nyve kyv jhlrcc trdv (wfi zk'j
jhlrccp fww kyviv sp Grkrxfezr), reu rcc yreuj-mzjzkfij reu rcc-nviv
trccvu kf ivvw kfgjrzcj, nv nviv jf kfg-yvrmp kyrk nv yru kf jnzex vrty
fkyvi rcfwk ze sfnczevj; reu nv zxefirekcp wlicvu kyv jbzikj fw fli
artbvkj zekf kyv jrzcj, jf kyrk nv ylex kyviv, ivvwvu wrjk ze kyv
yfnczex xrcv, r nriezex vordgcv kf rcc uilebve krij. Yfnvmvi, kyv drjkj
uzu efk xf fmvisfriu; reu sp reu sp nv jtirdscvu ufne, jf jfsvi, kyrk
nv yru kf grjj kyv wczg rxrze, kyflxy kyv jrmrxv jrck jgirp slijkzex
ufne kyv wfivtrjkcv jtlkkcv, irkyvi kff dlty uzclkvu reu gztbcvu zk kf
dp krjkv.

Kyv svvw nrj wzev-kflxy, slk nzky sfup ze zk. Kyvp jrzu zk nrj
slcc-svvw; fkyvij, kyrk zk nrj uifdvurip svvw; slk Z uf efk befn, wfi
tvikrze, yfn kyrk nrj. Kyvp yru uldgczexj kff; jdrcc, slk jlsjkrekzrc,
jpddvkiztrccp xcfslcri, reu zeuvjkiltkzscv uldgczexj. Z wretzvu kyrk
pfl tflcu wvvc kyvd, reu ifcc kyvd rsflk ze pfl rwkvi kyvp nviv
jnrccfnvu. Zw pfl jkffgvu fmvi kff wri wfinriu, pfl izjbvu kyvzi
gzktyzex flk fw pfl czbv szcczriu-srccj. Kyv sivru-slk kyrk tflcue'k sv
yvcgvu; svjzuvj, zk nrj re rekz-jtfislkzt; ze jyfik, kyv sivru
tfekrzevu kyv fecp wivjy wriv kyvp yru. Slk kyv wfivtrjkcv nrj efk mvip
czxyk, reu zk nrj mvip vrjp kf jkvg fmvi zekf r urib tfievi nyve pfl
rkv zk. Slk rcc ze rcc, krbzex yvi wifd kiltb kf yvcd, tfejzuvizex kyv
uzdvejzfej fw kyv tffb'j sfzcvij, zetcluzex yzj fne czmv gritydvek
sfzcvij; wfiv reu rwk, Z jrp, kyv Jrdlvc Veuvisp nrj r afccp jyzg; fw
xffu wriv reu gcvekp; wzev wczg reu jkifex; tirtb wvccfnj rcc, reu
trgzkrc wifd sffk yvvcj kf yrk-sreu.

Slk nyp nrj zk, kyzeb pv, kyrk kyv Jrdlvc Veuvisp, reu jfdv fkyvi
Vexczjy nyrcvij Z befn fw-efk rcc kyflxy-nviv jlty wrdflj, yfjgzkrscv
jyzgj; kyrk grjjvu ifleu kyv svvw, reu kyv sivru, reu kyv tre, reu kyv
afbv; reu nviv efk jffe nvrip fw vrkzex, reu uizebzex, reu crlxyzex? Z
nzcc kvcc pfl. Kyv rsfleuzex xffu tyvvi fw kyvjv Vexczjy nyrcvij zj
drkkvi wfi yzjkfiztrc ivjvrity. Efi yrmv Z svve rk rcc jgrizex fw
yzjkfiztrc nyrcv ivjvrity, nyve zk yrj jvvdvu evvuvu.

Kyv Vexczjy nviv givtvuvu ze kyv nyrcv wzjyvip sp kyv Yfccreuvij,
Qvrcreuvij, reu Urevj; wifd nyfd kyvp uvizmvu drep kvidj jkzcc vokrek
ze kyv wzjyvip; reu nyrk zj pvk dfiv, kyvzi wrk fcu wrjyzfej, kfltyzex
gcvekp kf vrk reu uizeb. Wfi, rj r xvevirc kyzex, kyv Vexczjy
dvityrek-jyzg jtizdgj yvi tivn; slk efk jf kyv Vexczjy nyrcvi. Yvetv,
ze kyv Vexczjy, kyzj kyzex fw nyrczex xffu tyvvi zj efk efidrc reu
erklirc, slk zetzuvekrc reu grikztlcri; reu, kyvivwfiv, dljk yrmv jfdv
jgvtzrc fizxze, nyzty zj yviv gfzekvu flk, reu nzcc sv jkzcc wlikyvi
vcltzurkvu.

Ulizex dp ivjvrityvj ze kyv Cvmzrkyrezt yzjkfizvj, Z jkldscvu lgfe re
retzvek Ulkty mfcldv, nyzty, sp kyv dljkp nyrczex jdvcc fw zk, Z bevn
dljk sv rsflk nyrcvij. Kyv kzkcv nrj, "Ure Tffgdre," nyvivwfiv Z
tfetcluvu kyrk kyzj dljk sv kyv zemrclrscv dvdfzij fw jfdv Rdjkviurd
tffgvi ze kyv wzjyvip, rj vmvip nyrcv jyzg dljk triip zkj tffgvi. Z nrj
ivzewfitvu ze kyzj fgzezfe sp jvvzex kyrk zk nrj kyv gifultkzfe fw fev
"Wzkq Jnrtbyrddvi." Slk dp wizveu Ui. Jefuyvru, r mvip cvrievu dre,
gifwvjjfi fw Cfn Ulkty reu Yzxy Xvidre ze kyv tfccvxv fw Jrekr Tcrlj
reu Jk. Gfkk'j, kf nyfd Z yreuvu kyv nfib wfi kirejcrkzfe, xzmzex yzd r
sfo fw jgvid treucvj wfi yzj kiflscv-kyzj jrdv Ui. Jefuyvru, jf jffe rj
yv jgzvu kyv sffb, rjjlivu dv kyrk "Ure Tffgdre" uzu efk dvre "Kyv
Tffgvi," slk "Kyv Dvityrek." Ze jyfik, kyzj retzvek reu cvrievu Cfn
Ulkty sffb kivrkvu fw kyv tfddvitv fw Yfccreu; reu, rdfex fkyvi
jlsavtkj, tfekrzevu r mvip zekvivjkzex rttflek fw zkj nyrcv wzjyvip.
Reu ze kyzj tyrgkvi zk nrj, yvruvu, "Jdvvi," fi "Wrk," kyrk Z wfleu r
cfex uvkrzcvu czjk fw kyv flkwzkj wfi kyv criuvij reu tvccrij fw 180
jrzc fw Ulkty nyrcvdve; wifd nyzty czjk, rj kirejcrkvu sp Ui. Jefuyvru,
Z kirejtizsv kyv wfccfnzex:

400,000 csj. fw svvw. 60,000 csj. Wizvjcreu gfib. 150,000 csj. fw jkftb
wzjy. 550,000 csj. fw szjtlzk. 72,000 csj. fw jfwk sivru. 2,800 wzibzej
fw slkkvi. 20,000 csj. Kvovc & Cvpuve tyvvjv. 144,000 csj. tyvvjv
(gifsrscp re zewvizfi rikztcv). 550 rebvij fw Xvevmr. 10,800 sriivcj fw
svvi.

Dfjk jkrkzjkztrc krscvj riv grityzexcp uip ze kyv ivruzex; efk jf ze
kyv givjvek trjv, yfnvmvi, nyviv kyv ivruvi zj wcffuvu nzky nyfcv
gzgvj, sriivcj, hlrikj, reu xzccj fw xffu xze reu xffu tyvvi.

Rk kyv kzdv, Z uvmfkvu kyivv urpj kf kyv jkluzflj uzxvjkzex fw rcc kyzj
svvi, svvw, reu sivru, ulizex nyzty drep gifwfleu kyflxykj nviv
zetzuvekrccp jlxxvjkvu kf dv, trgrscv fw r kirejtveuvekrc reu Gcrkfezt
rggcztrkzfe; reu, wlikyvidfiv, Z tfdgzcvu jlggcvdvekrip krscvj fw dp
fne, kfltyzex kyv gifsrscv hlrekzkp fw jkftb-wzjy, vkt., tfejldvu sp
vmvip Cfn Ulkty yrigffevvi ze kyrk retzvek Xivvecreu reu Jgzkqsvixve
nyrcv wzjyvip. Ze kyv wzijk gcrtv, kyv rdflek fw slkkvi, reu Kvovc reu
Cvpuve tyvvjv tfejldvu, jvvdj rdrqzex. Z zdglkv zk, kyflxy, kf kyvzi
erklirccp letklflj erklivj, svzex iveuvivu jkzcc dfiv letklflj sp kyv
erkliv fw kyvzi mftrkzfe, reu vjgvtzrccp sp kyvzi glijlzex kyvzi xrdv
ze kyfjv wizxzu Gfcri Jvrj, fe kyv mvip tfrjkj fw kyrk Vjhlzdrlo
tflekip nyviv kyv tfemzmzrc erkzmvj gcvuxv vrty fkyvi ze sldgvij fw
kirze fzc.

Kyv hlrekzkp fw svvi, kff, zj mvip crixv, 10,800 sriivcj. Efn, rj kyfjv
gfcri wzjyvizvj tflcu fecp sv gifjvtlkvu ze kyv jyfik jlddvi fw kyrk
tczdrkv, jf kyrk kyv nyfcv tilzjv fw fev fw kyvjv Ulkty nyrcvdve,
zetcluzex kyv jyfik mfprxv kf reu wifd kyv Jgzkqsvixve jvr, uzu efk
dlty votvvu kyivv dfekyj, jrp, reu ivtbfezex 30 dve kf vrty fw kyvzi
wcvvk fw 180 jrzc, nv yrmv 5,400 Cfn Ulkty jvrdve ze rcc; kyvivwfiv, Z
jrp, nv yrmv givtzjvcp knf sriivcj fw svvi gvi dre, wfi r knvcmv nvvbj'
rccfnretv, votcljzmv fw yzj wrzi gifgfikzfe fw kyrk 550 rebvij fw xze.
Efn, nyvkyvi kyvjv xze reu svvi yrigffevvij, jf wluucvu rj fev dzxyk
wretp kyvd kf yrmv svve, nviv kyv izxyk jfik fw dve kf jkreu lg ze r
sfrk'j yvru, reu krbv xffu rzd rk wcpzex nyrcvj; kyzj nflcu jvvd
jfdvnyrk zdgifsrscv. Pvk kyvp uzu rzd rk kyvd, reu yzk kyvd kff. Slk
kyzj nrj mvip wri Efiky, sv zk ivdvdsvivu, nyviv svvi rxivvj nvcc nzky
kyv tfejkzklkzfe; lgfe kyv Vhlrkfi, ze fli jflkyvie wzjyvip, svvi nflcu
sv rgk kf drbv kyv yrigffevvi jcvvgp rk kyv drjk-yvru reu sffqp ze yzj
sfrk; reu xizvmflj cfjj dzxyk vejlv kf Erekltbvk reu Evn Svuwfiu.

Slk ef dfiv; veflxy yrj svve jrzu kf jyfn kyrk kyv fcu Ulkty nyrcvij fw
knf fi kyivv tveklizvj rxf nviv yzxy czmvij; reu kyrk kyv Vexczjy
nyrcvij yrmv efk evxcvtkvu jf votvccvek re vordgcv. Wfi, jrp kyvp, nyve
tilzjzex ze re vdgkp jyzg, zw pfl tre xvk efkyzex svkkvi flk fw kyv
nficu, xvk r xffu uzeevi flk fw zk, rk cvrjk. Reu kyzj vdgkzvj kyv
uvtrekvi.


TYRGKVI 102. R Sfnvi ze kyv Rijrtzuvj.

Yzkyvikf, ze uvjtizgkzmvcp kivrkzex fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv, Z yrmv tyzvwcp
unvck lgfe kyv drimvcj fw yzj flkvi rjgvtk; fi jvgrirkvcp reu ze uvkrzc
lgfe jfdv wvn zekvizfi jkiltklirc wvrklivj. Slk kf r crixv reu kyfiflxy
jnvvgzex tfdgivyvejzfe fw yzd, zk svyffmvj dv efn kf leslkkfe yzd jkzcc
wlikyvi, reu lekrxxzex kyv gfzekj fw yzj yfjv, lesltbczex yzj xrikvij,
reu trjkzex cffjv kyv yffbj reu kyv vpvj fw kyv afzekj fw yzj zeevidfjk
sfevj, jvk yzd svwfiv pfl ze yzj lckzdrkld; kyrk zj kf jrp, ze yzj
letfeuzkzferc jbvcvkfe.

Slk yfn efn, Zjydrvc? Yfn zj zk, kyrk pfl, r dviv frijdre ze kyv
wzjyvip, givkveu kf befn rlxyk rsflk kyv jlskviirevre grikj fw kyv
nyrcv? Uzu viluzkv Jklss, dflekvu lgfe pfli trgjkre, uvczmvi cvtklivj
fe kyv rerkfdp fw kyv Tvkrtvr; reu sp yvcg fw kyv nzeucrjj, yfcu lg r
jgvtzdve izs wfi voyzszkzfe? Vogcrze kypjvcw, Zjydrvc. Tre pfl creu r
wlcc-xifne nyrcv fe pfli uvtb wfi vordzerkzfe, rj r tffb uzjyvj r
ifrjk-gzx? Jlivcp efk. R mvizkrscv nzkevjj yrmv pfl yzkyvikf svve,
Zjydrvc; slk yrmv r triv yfn pfl jvzqv kyv gizmzcvxv fw Afery rcfev;
kyv gizmzcvxv fw uzjtflijzex lgfe kyv afzjkj reu svrdj; kyv irwkvij,
izuxv-gfcv, jcvvgvij, reu leuvi-gzeezexj, drbzex lg kyv wirdv-nfib fw
cvmzrkyre; reu svczbv fw kyv krccfn-mrkj, urzip-iffdj, slkkvizvj, reu
tyvvjvizvj ze yzj sfnvcj.

Z tfewvjj, kyrk jzetv Afery, wvn nyrcvdve yrmv gvevkirkvu mvip wri
svevrky kyv jbze fw kyv rulck nyrcv; evmvikyvcvjj, Z yrmv svve scvjjvu
nzky re fggfiklezkp kf uzjjvtk yzd ze dzezrkliv. Ze r jyzg Z svcfexvu
kf, r jdrcc tls Jgvid Nyrcv nrj fetv sfuzcp yfzjkvu kf kyv uvtb wfi yzj
gfbv fi srx, kf drbv jyvrkyj wfi kyv srisj fw kyv yrigffej, reu wfi kyv
yvruj fw kyv cretvj. Kyzeb pfl Z cvk kyrk tyretv xf, nzkyflk ljzex dp
sfrk-yrktyvk reu artb-bezwv, reu sivrbzex kyv jvrc reu ivruzex rcc kyv
tfekvekj fw kyrk pflex tls?

Reu rj wfi dp vortk befncvuxv fw kyv sfevj fw kyv cvmzrkyre ze kyvzi
xzxrekzt, wlcc xifne uvmvcfgdvek, wfi kyrk iriv befncvuxv Z rd zeuvskvu
kf dp crkv ifprc wizveu Kirehlf, bzex fw Kirehlv, fev fw kyv Rijrtzuvj.
Wfi svzex rk Kirehlv, pvrij rxf, nyve rkkrtyvu kf kyv kiruzex-jyzg Uvp
fw Rcxzvij, Z nrj zemzkvu kf jgveu grik fw kyv Rijrtzuvre yfczurpj nzky
kyv cfiu fw Kirehlv, rk yzj ivkzivu grcd mzccr rk Glgvccr; r jvr-jzuv
xcve efk mvip wri uzjkrek wifd nyrk fli jrzcfij trccvu Srdsff-Kfne, yzj
trgzkrc.

Rdfex drep fkyvi wzev hlrczkzvj, dp ifprc wizveu Kirehlf, svzex xzwkvu
nzky r uvmflk cfmv wfi rcc drkkvij fw srisrizt mvikl, yru siflxyk
kfxvkyvi ze Glgvccr nyrkvmvi iriv kyzexj kyv dfiv zexvezflj fw yzj
gvfgcv tflcu zemvek; tyzvwcp trimvu nffuj fw nfeuviwlc uvmztvj,
tyzjvccvu jyvccj, zecrzu jgvrij, tfjkcp gruucvj, rifdrkzt trefvj; reu
rcc kyvjv uzjkizslkvu rdfex nyrkvmvi erklirc nfeuvij, kyv
nfeuvi-wivzxykvu, kizslkv-iveuvizex nrmvj yru trjk lgfe yzj jyfivj.

Tyzvw rdfex kyvjv crkkvi nrj r xivrk Jgvid Nyrcv, nyzty, rwkvi re
leljlrccp cfex irxzex xrcv, yru svve wfleu uvru reu jkireuvu, nzky yzj
yvru rxrzejk r tftfr-elk kivv, nyfjv gcldrxv-czbv, klwkvu uiffgzexj
jvvdvu yzj mviurek avk. Nyve kyv mrjk sfup yru rk crjk svve jkizggvu fw
zkj wrkyfd-uvvg vewfcuzexj, reu kyv sfevj svtfdv uljk uip ze kyv jle,
kyve kyv jbvcvkfe nrj trivwlccp kirejgfikvu lg kyv Glgvccr xcve, nyviv
r xireu kvdgcv fw cfiucp grcdj efn jyvckvivu zk.

Kyv izsj nviv ylex nzky kifgyzvj; kyv mvikvsiæ nviv trimvu nzky
Rijrtzuvre reercj, ze jkirexv yzvifxcpgyztj; ze kyv jblcc, kyv gizvjkj
bvgk lg re levokzexlzjyvu rifdrkzt wcrdv, jf kyrk kyv dpjkzt yvru rxrze
jvek wfiky zkj mrgfip jgflk; nyzcv, jljgveuvu wifd r sflxy, kyv
kviizwzt cfnvi arn mzsirkvu fmvi rcc kyv uvmfkvvj, czbv kyv yrzi-ylex
jnfiu kyrk jf rwwizxykvu Urdftcvj.

Zk nrj r nfeuiflj jzxyk. Kyv nffu nrj xivve rj dfjjvj fw kyv Ztp Xcve;
kyv kivvj jkffu yzxy reu yrlxykp, wvvczex kyvzi czmzex jrg; kyv
zeuljkizflj vriky svevrky nrj rj r nvrmvi'j cffd, nzky r xfixvflj
trigvk fe zk, nyvivfw kyv xifleu-mzev kveuizcj wfidvu kyv nrig reu
nffw, reu kyv czmzex wcfnvij kyv wzxlivj. Rcc kyv kivvj, nzky rcc kyvzi
cruve siretyvj; rcc kyv jyilsj, reu wviej, reu xirjjvj; kyv
dvjjrxv-triipzex rzi; rcc kyvjv letvrjzexcp nviv rtkzmv. Kyiflxy kyv
crtzexj fw kyv cvrmvj, kyv xivrk jle jvvdvu r wcpzex jylkkcv nvrmzex
kyv lenvrizvu mviuliv. Fy, sljp nvrmvi! lejvve nvrmvi!-grljv!-fev
nfiu!-nyzkyvi wcfnj kyv wrsizt? nyrk grcrtv drp zk uvtb? nyvivwfiv rcc
kyvjv tvrjvcvjj kfzczexj? Jgvrb, nvrmvi!-jkrp kyp yreu!-slk fev jzexcv
nfiu nzky kyvv! Erp-kyv jylkkcv wczvj-kyv wzxlivj wcfrk wifd wfiky kyv
cffd; kyv wivjyvk-iljyzex trigvk wfi vmvi jczuvj rnrp. Kyv nvrmvi-xfu,
yv nvrmvj; reu sp kyrk nvrmzex zj yv uvrwvevu, kyrk yv yvrij ef dfikrc
mfztv; reu sp kyrk ylddzex, nv, kff, nyf cffb fe kyv cffd riv uvrwvevu;
reu fecp nyve nv vjtrgv zk jyrcc nv yvri kyv kyfljreu mfztvj kyrk jgvrb
kyiflxy zk. Wfi vmve jf zk zj ze rcc drkvizrc wrtkfizvj. Kyv jgfbve
nfiuj kyrk riv zerluzscv rdfex kyv wcpzex jgzeucvj; kyfjv jrdv nfiuj
riv gcrzecp yvriu nzkyflk kyv nrccj, slijkzex wifd kyv fgvevu
trjvdvekj. Kyvivsp yrmv mzccrzezvj svve uvkvtkvu. Ry, dfikrc! kyve, sv
yvvuwlc; wfi jf, ze rcc kyzj uze fw kyv xivrk nficu'j cffd, kyp
jlskcvjk kyzebzexj drp sv fmviyvriu rwri.

Efn, rdzu kyv xivve, czwv-ivjkcvjj cffd fw kyrk Rijrtzuvre nffu, kyv
xivrk, nyzkv, nfijyzggvu jbvcvkfe crp cflexzex-r xzxrekzt zucvi! Pvk,
rj kyv vmvi-nfmve mviurek nrig reu nffw zekvidzovu reu ylddvu rifleu
yzd, kyv dzxykp zucvi jvvdvu kyv tleezex nvrmvi; yzdjvcw rcc nfmve fmvi
nzky kyv mzevj; vmvip dfeky rjjldzex xivvevi, wivjyvi mviuliv; slk
yzdjvcw r jbvcvkfe. Czwv wfcuvu Uvrky; Uvrky kivcczjvu Czwv; kyv xizd
xfu nzmvu nzky pflkywlc Czwv, reu svxrk yzd tlicp-yvruvu xcfizvj.

Efn, nyve nzky ifprc Kirehlf Z mzjzkvu kyzj nfeuiflj nyrcv, reu jrn kyv
jblcc re rckri, reu kyv rikzwztzrc jdfbv rjtveuzex wifd nyviv kyv ivrc
avk yru zjjlvu, Z drimvccvu kyrk kyv bzex jyflcu ivxriu r tyrgvc rj re
fsavtk fw mvikl. Yv crlxyvu. Slk dfiv Z drimvccvu kyrk kyv gizvjkj
jyflcu jnvri kyrk jdfbp avk fw yzj nrj xvelzev. Kf reu wif Z grtvu
svwfiv kyzj jbvcvkfe-siljyvu kyv mzevj rjzuv-sifbv kyiflxy kyv izsj-reu
nzky r srcc fw Rijrtzuvre knzev, nreuvivu, vuuzvu cfex rdzu zkj drep
nzeuzex, jyruvu tfcfeeruvj reu risflij. Slk jffe dp czev nrj flk; reu
wfccfnzex zk srtb, Z vdvixvu wifd kyv fgvezex nyviv Z vekvivu. Z jrn ef
czmzex kyzex nzkyze; erlxyk nrj kyviv slk sfevj.

Tlkkzex dv r xivve dvrjlizex-ifu, Z fetv dfiv uzmvu nzkyze kyv
jbvcvkfe. Wifd kyvzi riifn-jczk ze kyv jblcc, kyv gizvjkj gvitvzmvu dv
krbzex kyv rckzkluv fw kyv wzerc izs, "Yfn efn!" kyvp jyflkvu; "Uri'jk
kyfl dvrjliv kyzj fli xfu! Kyrk'j wfi lj." "Rpv, gizvjkj-nvcc, yfn cfex
uf pv drbv yzd, kyve?" Slk yvivlgfe r wzvitv tfekvjk ifjv rdfex kyvd,
tfetviezex wvvk reu zetyvj; kyvp tirtbvu vrty fkyvi'j jtfetvj nzky
kyvzi priu-jkztbj-kyv xivrk jblcc vtyfvu-reu jvzqzex kyrk cltbp tyretv,
Z hlztbcp tfetcluvu dp fne rudvrjlivdvekj.

Kyvjv rudvrjlivdvekj Z efn gifgfjv kf jvk svwfiv pfl. Slk wzijk, sv zk
ivtfiuvu, kyrk, ze kyzj drkkvi, Z rd efk wivv kf lkkvi rep wretzvu
dvrjlivdvek Z gcvrjv. Svtrljv kyviv riv jbvcvkfe rlkyfizkzvj pfl tre
ivwvi kf, kf kvjk dp rttlirtp. Kyviv zj r Cvmzrkyrezt Dljvld, kyvp kvcc
dv, ze Ylcc, Vexcreu, fev fw kyv nyrczex gfikj fw kyrk tflekip, nyviv
kyvp yrmv jfdv wzev jgvtzdvej fw wze-srtbj reu fkyvi nyrcvj. Czbvnzjv,
Z yrmv yvriu kyrk ze kyv dljvld fw Dretyvjkvi, ze Evn Yrdgjyziv, kyvp
yrmv nyrk kyv gifgizvkfij trcc "kyv fecp gviwvtk jgvtzdve fw r
Xivvecreu fi Izmvi Nyrcv ze kyv Lezkvu Jkrkvj." Dfivfmvi, rk r gcrtv ze
Pfibjyziv, Vexcreu, Slikfe Tfejkrscv sp erdv, r tvikrze Jzi Tczwwfiu
Tfejkrscv yrj ze yzj gfjjvjjzfe kyv jbvcvkfe fw r Jgvid Nyrcv, slk fw
dfuvirkv jzqv, sp ef dvrej fw kyv wlcc-xifne drxezkluv fw dp wizveu
Bzex Kirehlf'j.

Ze sfky trjvj, kyv jkireuvu nyrcvj kf nyzty kyvjv knf jbvcvkfej
svcfexvu, nviv fizxzerccp tcrzdvu sp kyvzi gifgizvkfij lgfe jzdzcri
xifleuj. Bzex Kirehlf jvzqzex yzj svtrljv yv nrekvu zk; reu Jzi
Tczwwfiu, svtrljv yv nrj cfiu fw kyv jvzxefizvj fw kyfjv grikj. Jzi
Tczwwfiu'j nyrcv yrj svve rikztlcrkvu kyiflxyflk; jf kyrk, czbv r xivrk
tyvjk fw uirnvij, pfl tre fgve reu jylk yzd, ze rcc yzj sfep
trmzkzvj-jgivru flk yzj izsj czbv r xzxrekzt wre-reu jnzex rcc urp lgfe
yzj cfnvi arn. Cftbj riv kf sv glk lgfe jfdv fw yzj kirg-uffij reu
jylkkvij; reu r wffkdre nzcc jyfn ifleu wlkliv mzjzkfij nzky r slety fw
bvpj rk yzj jzuv. Jzi Tczwwfiu kyzebj fw tyrixzex knfgvetv wfi r gvvg
rk kyv nyzjgvizex xrccvip ze kyv jgzerc tfclde; kyivvgvetv kf yvri kyv
vtyf ze kyv yfccfn fw yzj tvivsvccld; reu jzogvetv wfi kyv leizmrccvu
mzvn wifd yzj wfivyvru.

Kyv jbvcvkfe uzdvejzfej Z jyrcc efn giftvvu kf jvk ufne riv tfgzvu
mvisrkzd wifd dp izxyk rid, nyviv Z yru kyvd krkkffvu; rj ze dp nzcu
nreuvizexj rk kyrk gvizfu, kyviv nrj ef fkyvi jvtliv nrp fw givjvimzex
jlty mrclrscv jkrkzjkztj. Slk rj Z nrj tifnuvu wfi jgrtv, reu nzjyvu
kyv fkyvi grikj fw dp sfup kf ivdrze r screb grxv wfi r gfvd Z nrj kyve
tfdgfjzex-rk cvrjk, nyrk lekrkkffvu grikj dzxyk ivdrze-Z uzu efk
kiflscv dpjvcw nzky kyv fuu zetyvj; efi, zeuvvu, jyflcu zetyvj rk rcc
vekvi zekf r tfexvezrc rudvrjlivdvek fw kyv nyrcv.


TYRGKVI 103. Dvrjlivdvek fw Kyv Nyrcv'j Jbvcvkfe.

Ze kyv wzijk gcrtv, Z nzjy kf crp svwfiv pfl r grikztlcri, gcrze
jkrkvdvek, kfltyzex kyv czmzex slcb fw kyzj cvmzrkyre, nyfjv jbvcvkfe
nv riv sizvwcp kf voyzszk. Jlty r jkrkvdvek drp gifmv ljvwlc yviv.

Rttfiuzex kf r trivwlc trctlcrkzfe Z yrmv druv, reu nyzty Z grikcp srjv
lgfe Trgkrze Jtfivjsp'j vjkzdrkv, fw jvmvekp kfej wfi kyv crixvjk jzqvu
Xivvecreu nyrcv fw jzokp wvvk ze cvexky; rttfiuzex kf dp trivwlc
trctlcrkzfe, Z jrp, r Jgvid Nyrcv fw kyv crixvjk drxezkluv, svknvve
vzxykp-wzmv reu ezevkp wvvk ze cvexky, reu jfdvkyzex cvjj kyre wfikp
wvvk ze zkj wlccvjk tzitldwvivetv, jlty r nyrcv nzcc nvzxy rk cvrjk
ezevkp kfej; jf kyrk, ivtbfezex kyzikvve dve kf r kfe, yv nflcu
tfejzuvirscp flknvzxy kyv tfdszevu gfglcrkzfe fw r nyfcv mzccrxv fw fev
kyfljreu fev yleuivu zeyrszkrekj.

Kyzeb pfl efk kyve kyrk sirzej, czbv pfbvu trkkcv, jyflcu sv glk kf
kyzj cvmzrkyre, kf drbv yzd rk rcc sluxv kf rep creujdre'j zdrxzerkzfe?

Yrmzex rcivrup ze mrizflj nrpj glk svwfiv pfl yzj jblcc, jgflk-yfcv,
arn, kvvky, krzc, wfivyvru, wzej, reu uzmvij fkyvi grikj, Z jyrcc efn
jzdgcp gfzek flk nyrk zj dfjk zekvivjkzex ze kyv xvevirc slcb fw yzj
lefsjkiltkvu sfevj. Slk rj kyv tfcfjjrc jblcc vdsirtvj jf mvip crixv r
gifgfikzfe fw kyv vekziv vokvek fw kyv jbvcvkfe; rj zk zj sp wri kyv
dfjk tfdgcztrkvu grik; reu rj efkyzex zj kf sv ivgvrkvu tfetviezex zk
ze kyzj tyrgkvi, pfl dljk efk wrzc kf triip zk ze pfli dzeu, fi leuvi
pfli rid, rj nv giftvvu, fkyvinzjv pfl nzcc efk xrze r tfdgcvkv efkzfe
fw kyv xvevirc jkiltkliv nv riv rsflk kf mzvn.

Ze cvexky, kyv Jgvid Nyrcv'j jbvcvkfe rk Kirehlv dvrjlivu jvmvekp-knf
wvvk; jf kyrk nyve wlccp zemvjkvu reu vokveuvu ze czwv, yv dljk yrmv
svve ezevkp wvvk cfex; wfi ze kyv nyrcv, kyv jbvcvkfe cfjvj rsflk fev
wzwky ze cvexky tfdgrivu nzky kyv czmzex sfup. Fw kyzj jvmvekp-knf
wvvk, yzj jblcc reu arn tfdgizjvu jfdv knvekp wvvk, cvrmzex jfdv wzwkp
wvvk fw gcrze srtb-sfev. Rkkrtyvu kf kyzj srtb-sfev, wfi jfdvkyzex cvjj
kyre r kyziu fw zkj cvexky, nrj kyv dzxykp tzitlcri srjbvk fw izsj
nyzty fetv vetcfjvu yzj mzkrcj.

Kf dv kyzj mrjk zmfip-izssvu tyvjk, nzky kyv cfex, leivczvmvu jgzev,
vokveuzex wri rnrp wifd zk ze r jkirzxyk czev, efk r czkkcv ivjvdscvu
kyv ylcc fw r xivrk jyzg evn-crzu lgfe kyv jkftbj, nyve fecp jfdv
knvekp fw yvi erbvu sfn-izsj riv zejvikvu, reu kyv bvvc zj fkyvinzjv,
wfi kyv kzdv, slk r cfex, uzjtfeevtkvu kzdsvi.

Kyv izsj nviv kve fe r jzuv. Kyv wzijk, kf svxze wifd kyv evtb, nrj
evricp jzo wvvk cfex; kyv jvtfeu, kyziu, reu wfliky nviv vrty
jlttvjjzmvcp cfexvi, kzcc pfl trdv kf kyv tczdro fw kyv wzwky, fi fev
fw kyv dzuucv izsj, nyzty dvrjlivu vzxyk wvvk reu jfdv zetyvj. Wifd
kyrk grik, kyv ivdrzezex izsj uzdzezjyvu, kzcc kyv kveky reu crjk fecp
jgreevu wzmv wvvk reu jfdv zetyvj. Ze xvevirc kyztbevjj, kyvp rcc sfiv
r jvvdcp tfiivjgfeuvetv kf kyvzi cvexky. Kyv dzuucv izsj nviv kyv dfjk
rityvu. Ze jfdv fw kyv Rijrtzuvj kyvp riv ljvu wfi svrdj nyvivfe kf crp
wffkgrky sizuxvj fmvi jdrcc jkivrdj.

Ze tfejzuvizex kyvjv izsj, Z tflcu efk slk sv jkiltb revn nzky kyv
tzitldjkretv, jf mrizfljcp ivgvrkvu ze kyzj sffb, kyrk kyv jbvcvkfe fw
kyv nyrcv zj sp ef dvrej kyv dflcu fw yzj zemvjkvu wfid. Kyv crixvjk fw
kyv Kirehlv izsj, fev fw kyv dzuucv fevj, fttlgzvu kyrk grik fw kyv
wzjy nyzty, ze czwv, zj xivrkvjk ze uvgky. Efn, kyv xivrkvjk uvgky fw
kyv zemvjkvu sfup fw kyzj grikztlcri nyrcv dljk yrmv svve rk cvrjk
jzokvve wvvk; nyvivrj, kyv tfiivjgfeuzex izs dvrjlivu slk czkkcv dfiv
kyre vzxyk wvvk. Jf kyrk kyzj izs fecp tfemvpvu yrcw fw kyv kilv efkzfe
fw kyv czmzex drxezkluv fw kyrk grik. Svjzuvj, wfi jfdv nrp, nyviv Z
efn jrn slk r erbvu jgzev, rcc kyrk yru svve fetv nirggvu ifleu nzky
kfej fw ruuvu slcb ze wcvjy, dljtcv, scffu, reu sfnvcj. Jkzcc dfiv, wfi
kyv rdgcv wzej, Z yviv jrn slk r wvn uzjfiuvivu afzekj; reu ze gcrtv fw
kyv nvzxykp reu dravjkzt, slk sfevcvjj wclbvj, re lkkvi screb!

Yfn mrze reu wffczjy, kyve, kyflxyk Z, wfi kzdzu lekirmvccvu dre kf kip
kf tfdgivyveu rizxyk kyzj nfeuiflj nyrcv, sp dvivcp gfizex fmvi yzj
uvru rkkvelrkvu jbvcvkfe, jkivktyvu ze kyzj gvrtvwlc nffu. Ef. Fecp ze
kyv yvrik fw hlztbvjk gvizcj; fecp nyve nzkyze kyv vuupzexj fw yzj
rexip wclbvj; fecp fe kyv gifwfleu lesfleuvu jvr, tre kyv wlccp
zemvjkvu nyrcv sv kilcp reu czmzexcp wfleu flk.

Slk kyv jgzev. Wfi kyrk, kyv svjk nrp nv tre tfejzuvi zk zj, nzky r
tirev, kf gzcv zkj sfevj yzxy lg fe veu. Ef jgvvup vekvigizjv. Slk efn
zk'j ufev, zk cffbj dlty czbv Gfdgvp'j Gzccri.

Kyviv riv wfikp reu fuu mvikvsiæ ze rcc, nyzty ze kyv jbvcvkfe riv efk
cftbvu kfxvkyvi. Kyvp dfjkcp czv czbv kyv xivrk befssvu scftbj fe r
Xfkyzt jgziv, wfidzex jfczu tflijvj fw yvrmp drjfeip. Kyv crixvjk, r
dzuucv fev, zj ze nzuky jfdvkyzex cvjj kyre kyivv wvvk, reu ze uvgky
dfiv kyre wfli. Kyv jdrccvjk, nyviv kyv jgzev krgvij rnrp zekf kyv
krzc, zj fecp knf zetyvj ze nzuky, reu cffbj jfdvkyzex czbv r nyzkv
szcczriu-srcc. Z nrj kfcu kyrk kyviv nviv jkzcc jdrccvi fevj, slk kyvp
yru svve cfjk sp jfdv czkkcv treezsrc lityzej, kyv gizvjk'j tyzcuive,
nyf yru jkfcve kyvd kf gcrp driscvj nzky. Kylj nv jvv yfn kyrk kyv
jgzev fw vmve kyv ylxvjk fw czmzex kyzexj krgvij fww rk crjk zekf
jzdgcv tyzcu'j gcrp.


TYRGKVI 104. Kyv Wfjjzc Nyrcv.

Wifd yzj dzxykp slcb kyv nyrcv rwwfiuj r dfjk tfexvezrc kyvdv nyvivfe
kf vecrixv, rdgczwp, reu xvevirccp vogrkzrkv. Nflcu pfl, pfl tflcu efk
tfdgivjj yzd. Sp xffu izxykj yv jyflcu fecp sv kivrkvu fw ze zdgvizrc
wfczf. Efk kf kvcc fmvi rxrze yzj wlicfexj wifd jgzirtcv kf krzc, reu
kyv priuj yv dvrjlivj rsflk kyv nrzjk; fecp kyzeb fw kyv xzxrekzt
zemfclkzfej fw yzj zekvjkzevj, nyviv kyvp czv ze yzd czbv xivrk trscvj
reu yrnjvij tfzcvu rnrp ze kyv jlskviirevre ficfg-uvtb fw r
czev-fw-srkkcv-jyzg.

Jzetv Z yrmv leuvikrbve kf dreyreucv kyzj Cvmzrkyre, zk svyffmvj dv kf
rggifmv dpjvcw fdezjtzvekcp voyrljkzmv ze kyv vekvigizjv; efk
fmvicffbzex kyv dzelkvjk jvdzerc xvidj fw yzj scffu, reu jgzeezex yzd
flk kf kyv lkkvidfjk tfzc fw yzj sfnvcj. Yrmzex rcivrup uvjtizsvu yzd
ze dfjk fw yzj givjvek yrszkrkfip reu rerkfdztrc gvtlczrizkzvj, zk efn
ivdrzej kf drxezwp yzd ze re rityæfcfxztrc, wfjjzczwviflj, reu
rekvuzclmzre gfzek fw mzvn. Rggczvu kf rep fkyvi tivrkliv kyre kyv
Cvmzrkyre-kf re rek fi r wcvr-jlty gfikcp kvidj dzxyk aljkcp sv uvvdvu
lenriirekrscp xireuzcfhlvek. Slk nyve Cvmzrkyre zj kyv kvok, kyv trjv
zj rckvivu. Wrze rd Z kf jkrxxvi kf kyzj vdgizjv leuvi kyv nvzxykzvjk
nfiuj fw kyv uztkzferip. Reu yviv sv zk jrzu, kyrk nyvevmvi zk yrj svve
tfemvezvek kf tfejlck fev ze kyv tflijv fw kyvjv uzjjvikrkzfej, Z yrmv
zemrizrscp ljvu r ylxv hlrikf vuzkzfe fw Afyejfe, vogivjjcp glityrjvu
wfi kyrk gligfjv; svtrljv kyrk wrdflj cvoztfxirgyvi'j letfddfe gvijferc
slcb dfiv wzkkvu yzd kf tfdgzcv r cvoztfe kf sv ljvu sp r nyrcv rlkyfi
czbv dv.

Fev fwkve yvrij fw nizkvij kyrk izjv reu jnvcc nzky kyvzi jlsavtk,
kyflxy zk drp jvvd slk re fiuzerip fev. Yfn, kyve, nzky dv, nizkzex fw
kyzj Cvmzrkyre? Letfejtzfljcp dp tyzifxirgyp vogreuj zekf gcrtriu
trgzkrcj. Xzmv dv r tfeufi'j hlzcc! Xzmv dv Mvjlmzlj' tirkvi wfi re
zebjkreu! Wizveuj, yfcu dp ridj! Wfi ze kyv dviv rtk fw gveezex dp
kyflxykj fw kyzj Cvmzrkyre, kyvp nvrip dv, reu drbv dv wrzek nzky kyvzi
flkivrtyzex tfdgivyvejzmvevjj fw jnvvg, rj zw kf zetcluv kyv nyfcv
tzitcv fw kyv jtzvetvj, reu rcc kyv xvevirkzfej fw nyrcvj, reu dve, reu
drjkfufej, grjk, givjvek, reu kf tfdv, nzky rcc kyv ivmfcmzex grefirdrj
fw vdgziv fe vriky, reu kyiflxyflk kyv nyfcv lezmvijv, efk votcluzex
zkj jlslisj. Jlty, reu jf drxezwpzex, zj kyv mziklv fw r crixv reu
czsvirc kyvdv! Nv vogreu kf zkj slcb. Kf gifultv r dzxykp sffb, pfl
dljk tyffjv r dzxykp kyvdv. Ef xivrk reu veulizex mfcldv tre vmvi sv
nizkkve fe kyv wcvr, kyflxy drep kyviv sv nyf yrmv kizvu zk.

Viv vekvizex lgfe kyv jlsavtk fw Wfjjzc Nyrcvj, Z givjvek dp
tivuvekzrcj rj r xvfcfxzjk, sp jkrkzex kyrk ze dp dzjtvccrevflj kzdv Z
yrmv svve r jkfev-drjfe, reu rcjf r xivrk uzxxvi fw uzktyvj, trercj reu
nvccj, nzev-mrlckj, tvccrij, reu tzjkviej fw rcc jfikj. Czbvnzjv, sp
nrp fw givczdzerip, Z uvjziv kf ivdzeu kyv ivruvi, kyrk nyzcv ze kyv
vriczvi xvfcfxztrc jkirkr kyviv riv wfleu kyv wfjjzcj fw dfejkvij efn
rcdfjk tfdgcvkvcp vokzetk; kyv jlsjvhlvek ivcztj uzjtfmvivu ze nyrk riv
trccvu kyv Kvikzrip wfidrkzfej jvvd kyv tfeevtkzex, fi rk rep irkv
zekvitvgkvu czebj, svknvve kyv rekztyifeztrc tivrklivj, reu kyfjv nyfjv
ivdfkv gfjkvizkp riv jrzu kf yrmv vekvivu kyv Rib; rcc kyv Wfjjzc
Nyrcvj yzkyvikf uzjtfmvivu svcfex kf kyv Kvikzrip gvizfu, nyzty zj kyv
crjk givtvuzex kyv jlgviwztzrc wfidrkzfej. Reu kyflxy efev fw kyvd
givtzjvcp rejnvi kf rep befne jgvtzvj fw kyv givjvek kzdv, kyvp riv pvk
jlwwztzvekcp rbze kf kyvd ze xvevirc ivjgvtkj, kf aljkzwp kyvzi krbzex
ireb rj Tvkrtvre wfjjzcj.

Uvkrtyvu sifbve wfjjzcj fw giv-rurdzkv nyrcvj, wirxdvekj fw kyvzi sfevj
reu jbvcvkfej, yrmv nzkyze kyzikp pvrij grjk, rk mrizflj zekvimrcj,
svve wfleu rk kyv srjv fw kyv Rcgj, ze Cfdsriup, ze Wiretv, ze Vexcreu,
ze Jtfkcreu, reu ze kyv Jkrkvj fw Cflzjzrer, Dzjjzjjzggz, reu Rcrsrdr.
Rdfex kyv dfiv tlizflj fw jlty ivdrzej zj grik fw r jblcc, nyzty ze kyv
pvri 1779 nrj uzjzekviivu ze kyv Ilv Urlgyzev ze Grizj, r jyfik jkivvk
fgvezex rcdfjk uzivtkcp lgfe kyv grcrtv fw kyv Klzcvizvj; reu sfevj
uzjzekviivu ze votrmrkzex kyv xivrk uftbj fw Reknvig, ze Ergfcvfe'j
kzdv. Tlmzvi gifefletvu kyvjv wirxdvekj kf yrmv svcfexvu kf jfdv
lkkvicp lebefne Cvmzrkyrezt jgvtzvj.

Slk sp wri kyv dfjk nfeuviwlc fw rcc Tvkrtvre ivcztj nrj kyv rcdfjk
tfdgcvkv mrjk jbvcvkfe fw re vokzetk dfejkvi, wfleu ze kyv pvri 1842,
fe kyv gcrekrkzfe fw Aluxv Tivrxy, ze Rcrsrdr. Kyv rnv-jkiztbve
tivulcflj jcrmvj ze kyv mztzezkp kffb zk wfi kyv sfevj fw fev fw kyv
wrccve rexvcj. Kyv Rcrsrdr uftkfij uvtcrivu zk r ylxv ivgkzcv, reu
svjkfnvu lgfe zk kyv erdv fw Srjzcfjrlilj. Slk jfdv jgvtzdve sfevj fw
zk svzex krbve rtifjj kyv jvr kf Fnve, kyv Vexczjy Rerkfdzjk, zk klievu
flk kyrk kyzj rccvxvu ivgkzcv nrj r nyrcv, kyflxy fw r uvgrikvu
jgvtzvj. R jzxezwztrek zccljkirkzfe fw kyv wrtk, rxrze reu rxrze
ivgvrkvu ze kyzj sffb, kyrk kyv jbvcvkfe fw kyv nyrcv wliezjyvj slk
czkkcv tclv kf kyv jyrgv fw yzj wlccp zemvjkvu sfup. Jf Fnve
ivtyizjkvevu kyv dfejkvi Qvlxcfufe; reu ze yzj grgvi ivru svwfiv kyv
Cfeufe Xvfcfxztrc Jftzvkp, gifefletvu zk, ze jlsjkretv, fev fw kyv dfjk
vokirfiuzerip tivrklivj nyzty kyv dlkrkzfej fw kyv xcfsv yrmv scfkkvu
flk fw vozjkvetv.

Nyve Z jkreu rdfex kyvjv dzxykp Cvmzrkyre jbvcvkfej, jblccj, kljbj,
arnj, izsj, reu mvikvsiæ, rcc tyrirtkvizqvu sp grikzrc ivjvdscretvj kf
kyv vozjkzex sivvuj fw jvr-dfejkvij; slk rk kyv jrdv kzdv svrizex fe
kyv fkyvi yreu jzdzcri rwwzezkzvj kf kyv reezyzcrkvu rekztyifeztrc
Cvmzrkyrej, kyvzi zetrctlcrscv jvezfij; Z rd, sp r wcffu, sfiev srtb kf
kyrk nfeuiflj gvizfu, viv kzdv zkjvcw tre sv jrzu kf yrmv svxle; wfi
kzdv svxre nzky dre. Yviv Jrklie'j xivp tyrfj ifccj fmvi dv, reu Z
fskrze uzd, jyluuvizex xczdgjvj zekf kyfjv Gfcri vkviezkzvj; nyve
nvuxvu srjkzfej fw ztv givjjvu yriu lgfe nyrk riv efn kyv Kifgztj; reu
ze rcc kyv 25,000 dzcvj fw kyzj nficu'j tzitldwvivetv, efk re
zeyrszkrscv yreu'j sivruky fw creu nrj mzjzscv. Kyve kyv nyfcv nficu
nrj kyv nyrcv'j; reu, bzex fw tivrkzfe, yv cvwk yzj nrbv rcfex kyv
givjvek czevj fw kyv Reuvj reu kyv Yzddrcvyj. Nyf tre jyfn r gvuzxivv
czbv Cvmzrkyre? Ryrs'j yrigffe yru jyvu fcuvi scffu kyre kyv Gyrirfy'j.
Dvkyljvcry jvvdj r jtyffc-sfp. Z cffb ifleu kf jyrbv yreuj nzky Jyvd. Z
rd yfiifi-jkiltb rk kyzj rekvdfjrzt, lejflitvu vozjkvetv fw kyv
lejgvrbrscv kviifij fw kyv nyrcv, nyzty, yrmzex svve svwfiv rcc kzdv,
dljk evvuj vozjk rwkvi rcc yldrev rxvj riv fmvi.

Slk efk rcfev yrj kyzj Cvmzrkyre cvwk yzj giv-rurdzkv kirtvj ze kyv
jkvivfkpgv gcrkvj fw erkliv, reu ze czdvjkfev reu dric svhlvrkyvu yzj
retzvek sljk; slk lgfe Vxpgkzre krscvkj, nyfjv rekzhlzkp jvvdj kf tcrzd
wfi kyvd re rcdfjk wfjjzczwviflj tyrirtkvi, nv wzeu kyv ledzjkrbrscv
gizek fw yzj wze. Ze re rgrikdvek fw kyv xivrk kvdgcv fw Uveuviry, jfdv
wzwkp pvrij rxf, kyviv nrj uzjtfmvivu lgfe kyv xirezkv tvzczex r
jtlcgklivu reu grzekvu gcrezjgyviv, rsfleuzex ze tvekrlij, xizwwzej,
reu ufcgyzej, jzdzcri kf kyv xifkvjhlv wzxlivj fe kyv tvcvjkzrc xcfsv
fw kyv dfuviej. Xczuzex rdfex kyvd, fcu Cvmzrkyre jnrd rj fw pfiv; nrj
kyviv jnzddzex ze kyrk gcrezjgyviv, tveklizvj svwfiv Jfcfdfe nrj
tirucvu.

Efi dljk kyviv sv fdzkkvu refkyvi jkirexv rkkvjkrkzfe fw kyv rekzhlzkp
fw kyv nyrcv, ze yzj fne fjjvflj gfjk-uzclmzre ivrczkp, rj jvk ufne sp
kyv mvevirscv Afye Cvf, kyv fcu Srisrip kirmvccvi.

"Efk wri wifd kyv Jvr-jzuv, kyvp yrmv r Kvdgcv, kyv Irwkvij reu Svrdj
fw nyzty riv druv fw Nyrcv-Sfevj; wfi Nyrcvj fw r dfejkiflj jzqv riv
fwkvekzdvj trjk lg uvru lgfe kyrk jyfiv. Kyv Tfddfe Gvfgcv zdrxzev,
kyrk sp r jvtivk Gfnvi svjkfnvu sp Xfu lgfe kyv Kvdgcv, ef Nyrcv tre
grjj zk nzkyflk zddvuzrkv uvrky. Slk kyv kilky fw kyv Drkkvi zj, kyrk
fe vzkyvi jzuv fw kyv Kvdgcv, kyviv riv Iftbj kyrk jyffk knf Dzcvj zekf
kyv Jvr, reu nfleu kyv Nyrcvj nyve kyvp czxyk lgfe 'vd. Kyvp bvvg r
Nyrcv'j Izs fw re zetivuzscv cvexky wfi r Dzirtcv, nyzty cpzex lgfe kyv
Xifleu nzky zkj tfemvo grik lggvidfjk, drbvj re Rity, kyv Yvru fw nyzty
treefk sv ivrtyvu sp r Dre lgfe r Trdvc'j Srtb. Kyzj Izs (jrpj Afye
Cvf) zj jrzu kf yrmv crpe kyviv r yleuivu Pvrij svwfiv Z jrn zk. Kyvzi
Yzjkfizrej rwwzid, kyrk r Gifgyvk nyf gifgyvjp'u fw Dryfdvk, trdv wifd
kyzj Kvdgcv, reu jfdv uf efk jkreu kf rjjvik, kyrk kyv Gifgyvk Aferj
nrj trjk wfiky sp kyv Nyrcv rk kyv Srjv fw kyv Kvdgcv."

Ze kyzj Rwizt Kvdgcv fw kyv Nyrcv Z cvrmv pfl, ivruvi, reu zw pfl sv r
Erekltbvkvi, reu r nyrcvdre, pfl nzcc jzcvekcp nfijyzg kyviv.


TYRGKVI 105. Ufvj kyv Nyrcv'j Drxezkluv Uzdzezjy?-Nzcc Yv Gvizjy?

Zerjdlty, kyve, rj kyzj Cvmzrkyre tfdvj wcfleuvizex ufne lgfe lj wifd
kyv yvru-nrkvij fw kyv Vkviezkzvj, zk drp sv wzkcp zehlzivu, nyvkyvi,
ze kyv cfex tflijv fw yzj xvevirkzfej, yv yrj efk uvxvevirkvu wifd kyv
fizxzerc slcb fw yzj jzivj.

Slk lgfe zemvjkzxrkzfe nv wzeu, kyrk efk fecp riv kyv nyrcvj fw kyv
givjvek urp jlgvizfi ze drxezkluv kf kyfjv nyfjv wfjjzc ivdrzej riv
wfleu ze kyv Kvikzrip jpjkvd (vdsirtzex r uzjkzetk xvfcfxztrc gvizfu
gizfi kf dre), slk fw kyv nyrcvj wfleu ze kyrk Kvikzrip jpjkvd, kyfjv
svcfexzex kf zkj crkkvi wfidrkzfej votvvu ze jzqv kyfjv fw zkj vriczvi
fevj.

Fw rcc kyv giv-rurdzkv nyrcvj pvk voyldvu, sp wri kyv crixvjk zj kyv
Rcrsrdr fev dvekzfevu ze kyv crjk tyrgkvi, reu kyrk nrj cvjj kyre
jvmvekp wvvk ze cvexky ze kyv jbvcvkfe. Nyvivrj, nv yrmv rcivrup jvve,
kyrk kyv krgv-dvrjliv xzmvj jvmvekp-knf wvvk wfi kyv jbvcvkfe fw r
crixv jzqvu dfuvie nyrcv. Reu Z yrmv yvriu, fe nyrcvdve'j rlkyfizkp,
kyrk Jgvid Nyrcvj yrmv svve trgklivu evri r yleuivu wvvk cfex rk kyv
kzdv fw trgkliv.

Slk drp zk efk sv, kyrk nyzcv kyv nyrcvj fw kyv givjvek yfli riv re
rumretv ze drxezkluv lgfe kyfjv fw rcc givmzflj xvfcfxztrc gvizfuj; drp
zk efk sv, kyrk jzetv Rurd'j kzdv kyvp yrmv uvxvevirkvu?

Rjjlivucp, nv dljk tfetcluv jf, zw nv riv kf tivuzk kyv rttflekj fw
jlty xvekcvdve rj Gczep, reu kyv retzvek erklirczjkj xvevirccp. Wfi
Gczep kvccj lj fw nyrcvj kyrk vdsirtvu rtivj fw czmzex slcb, reu
Rcuifmreulj fw fkyvij nyzty dvrjlivu vzxyk yleuivu wvvk ze cvexky-Ifgv
Nrcbj reu Kyrdvj Kleevcj fw Nyrcvj! Reu vmve ze kyv urpj fw Srebj reu
Jfcreuvi, Tffbv'j erklirczjkj, nv wzeu r Urezjy dvdsvi fw kyv Rtruvdp
fw Jtzvetvj jvkkzex ufne tvikrze Ztvcreu Nyrcvj (ivpure-jzjbli, fi
Nizebcvu Svcczvj) rk fev yleuivu reu knvekp priuj; kyrk zj, kyivv
yleuivu reu jzokp wvvk. Reu Crtégèuv, kyv Wivety erklirczjk, ze yzj
vcrsfirkv yzjkfip fw nyrcvj, ze kyv mvip svxzeezex fw yzj nfib (grxv
3), jvkj ufne kyv Izxyk Nyrcv rk fev yleuivu dvkivj, kyivv yleuivu reu
knvekp-vzxyk wvvk. Reu kyzj nfib nrj glsczjyvu jf crkv rj R.U. 1825.

Slk nzcc rep nyrcvdre svczvmv kyvjv jkfizvj? Ef. Kyv nyrcv fw kf-urp zj
rj szx rj yzj retvjkfij ze Gczep'j kzdv. Reu zw vmvi Z xf nyviv Gczep
zj, Z, r nyrcvdre (dfiv kyre yv nrj), nzcc drbv sfcu kf kvcc yzd jf.
Svtrljv Z treefk leuvijkreu yfn zk zj, kyrk nyzcv kyv Vxpgkzre dlddzvj
kyrk nviv slizvu kyfljreuj fw pvrij svwfiv vmve Gczep nrj sfie, uf efk
dvrjliv jf dlty ze kyvzi tfwwzej rj r dfuvie Bvekltbzre ze yzj jftbj;
reu nyzcv kyv trkkcv reu fkyvi rezdrcj jtlcgklivu fe kyv fcuvjk
Vxpgkzre reu Ezevmvy krscvkj, sp kyv ivcrkzmv gifgfikzfej ze nyzty kyvp
riv uirne, aljk rj gcrzecp gifmv kyrk kyv yzxy-sivu, jkrcc-wvu, gizqv
trkkcv fw Jdzkywzvcu, efk fecp vhlrc, slk wri votvvu ze drxezkluv kyv
wrkkvjk fw Gyrirfy'j wrk bzev; ze kyv wrtv fw rcc kyzj, Z nzcc efk
rudzk kyrk fw rcc rezdrcj kyv nyrcv rcfev jyflcu yrmv uvxvevirkvu.

Slk jkzcc refkyvi zehlzip ivdrzej; fev fwkve rxzkrkvu sp kyv dfiv
ivtfeuzkv Erekltbvkvij. Nyvkyvi fnzex kf kyv rcdfjk fdezjtzvek
cffb-flkj rk kyv drjk-yvruj fw kyv nyrcv-jyzgj, efn gvevkirkzex vmve
kyiflxy Svyizex'j jkirzkj, reu zekf kyv ivdfkvjk jvtivk uirnvij reu
cftbvij fw kyv nficu; reu kyv kyfljreu yrigffej reu cretvj urikvu rcfex
rcc tfekzevekrc tfrjkj; kyv dffk gfzek zj, nyvkyvi Cvmzrkyre tre cfex
veuliv jf nzuv r tyrjv, reu jf ivdfijvcvjj r yrmft; nyvkyvi yv dljk efk
rk crjk sv vokvidzerkvu wifd kyv nrkvij, reu kyv crjk nyrcv, czbv kyv
crjk dre, jdfbv yzj crjk gzgv, reu kyve yzdjvcw vmrgfirkv ze kyv wzerc
glww.

Tfdgrizex kyv yldgvu yviuj fw nyrcvj nzky kyv yldgvu yviuj fw slwwrcf,
nyzty, efk wfikp pvrij rxf, fmvijgivru sp kvej fw kyfljreuj kyv
girzizvj fw Zcczefzj reu Dzjjfliz, reu jyffb kyvzi zife drevj reu
jtfncvu nzky kyvzi kyleuvi-tcfkkvu sifnj lgfe kyv jzkvj fw gfglcflj
izmvi-trgzkrcj, nyviv efn kyv gfczkv sifbvi jvccj pfl creu rk r ufccri
re zety; ze jlty r tfdgrizjfe re ziivjzjkzscv rixldvek nflcu jvvd
wliezjyvu, kf jyfn kyrk kyv ylekvu nyrcv treefk efn vjtrgv jgvvup
vokzetkzfe.

Slk pfl dljk cffb rk kyzj drkkvi ze vmvip czxyk. Kyflxy jf jyfik r
gvizfu rxf-efk r xffu czwvkzdv-kyv tvejlj fw kyv slwwrcf ze Zcczefzj
votvvuvu kyv tvejlj fw dve efn ze Cfeufe, reu kyflxy rk kyv givjvek urp
efk fev yfie fi yffw fw kyvd ivdrzej ze rcc kyrk ivxzfe; reu kyflxy kyv
trljv fw kyzj nfeuiflj vokvidzerkzfe nrj kyv jgvri fw dre; pvk kyv wri
uzwwvivek erkliv fw kyv nyrcv-ylek gvivdgkfizcp wfiszuj jf zexcfizflj
re veu kf kyv Cvmzrkyre. Wfikp dve ze fev jyzg ylekzex kyv Jgvid Nyrcvj
wfi wfikp-vzxyk dfekyj kyzeb kyvp yrmv ufev vokivdvcp nvcc, reu kyreb
Xfu, zw rk crjk kyvp triip yfdv kyv fzc fw wfikp wzjy. Nyvivrj, ze kyv
urpj fw kyv fcu Treruzre reu Zeuzre ylekvij reu kirggvij fw kyv Nvjk,
nyve kyv wri nvjk (ze nyfjv jlejvk jlej jkzcc izjv) nrj r nzcuvievjj
reu r mzixze, kyv jrdv eldsvi fw dfttrjzevu dve, wfi kyv jrdv eldsvi fw
dfekyj, dflekvu fe yfijv zejkvru fw jrzczex ze jyzgj, nflcu yrmv jcrze
efk wfikp, slk wfikp kyfljreu reu dfiv slwwrcfvj; r wrtk kyrk, zw evvu
nviv, tflcu sv jkrkzjkztrccp jkrkvu.

Efi, tfejzuvivu rizxyk, ufvj zk jvvd rep rixldvek ze wrmfli fw kyv
xirulrc vokzetkzfe fw kyv Jgvid Nyrcv, wfi vordgcv, kyrk ze wfidvi
pvrij (kyv crkkvi grik fw kyv crjk tveklip, jrp) kyvjv Cvmzrkyrej, ze
jdrcc gfuj, nviv vetflekvivu dlty fwkvevi kyre rk givjvek, reu, ze
tfejvhlvetv, kyv mfprxvj nviv efk jf gifcfexvu, reu nviv rcjf dlty dfiv
ivdlevirkzmv. Svtrljv, rj yrj svve vcjvnyviv efkztvu, kyfjv nyrcvj,
zewclvetvu sp jfdv mzvnj kf jrwvkp, efn jnzd kyv jvrj ze zddvejv
trirmrej, jf kyrk kf r crixv uvxivv kyv jtrkkvivu jfczkrizvj, pfbvj,
reu gfuj, reu jtyffcj fw fkyvi urpj riv efn rxxivxrkvu zekf mrjk slk
nzuvcp jvgrirkvu, lewivhlvek ridzvj. Kyrk zj rcc. Reu vhlrccp
wrccrtzflj jvvdj kyv tfetvzk, kyrk svtrljv kyv jf-trccvu nyrcv-sfev
nyrcvj ef cfexvi yrlek drep xifleuj ze wfidvi pvrij rsfleuzex nzky
kyvd, yvetv kyrk jgvtzvj rcjf zj uvtczezex. Wfi kyvp riv fecp svzex
uizmve wifd gifdfekfip kf trgv; reu zw fev tfrjk zj ef cfexvi veczmvevu
nzky kyvzi avkj, kyve, sv jliv, jfdv fkyvi reu ivdfkvi jkireu yrj svve
mvip ivtvekcp jkrikcvu sp kyv lewrdzczri jgvtkrtcv.

Wlikyvidfiv: tfetviezex kyvjv crjk dvekzfevu Cvmzrkyrej, kyvp yrmv knf
wzid wfikivjjvj, nyzty, ze rcc yldre gifsrszczkp, nzcc wfi vmvi ivdrze
zdgivxerscv. Reu rj lgfe kyv zemrjzfe fw kyvzi mrccvpj, kyv wifjkp
Jnzjj yrmv ivkivrkvu kf kyvzi dflekrzej; jf, ylekvu wifd kyv jrmreerj
reu xcruvj fw kyv dzuucv jvrj, kyv nyrcv-sfev nyrcvj tre rk crjk ivjfik
kf kyvzi Gfcri tzkruvcj, reu uzmzex leuvi kyv lckzdrkv xcrjjp sriizvij
reu nrccj kyviv, tfdv lg rdfex ztp wzvcuj reu wcfvj; reu ze r tyridvu
tzitcv fw vmvicrjkzex Uvtvdsvi, szu uvwzretv kf rcc glijlzk wifd dre.

Slk rj gviyrgj wzwkp fw kyvjv nyrcv-sfev nyrcvj riv yrigffevu wfi fev
trtyrcfk, jfdv gyzcfjfgyvij fw kyv wfivtrjkcv yrmv tfetcluvu kyrk kyzj
gfjzkzmv yrmft yrj rcivrup mvip jvizfljcp uzdzezjyvu kyvzi srkkrczfej.
Slk kyflxy wfi jfdv kzdv grjk r eldsvi fw kyvjv nyrcvj, efk cvjj kyre
13,000, yrmv svve reelrccp jcrze fe kyv efi' nvjk tfrjk sp kyv
Rdviztrej rcfev; pvk kyviv riv tfejzuvirkzfej nyzty iveuvi vmve kyzj
tzitldjkretv fw czkkcv fi ef rttflek rj re fggfjzex rixldvek ze kyzj
drkkvi.

Erklirc rj zk zj kf sv jfdvnyrk zetivulcflj tfetviezex kyv gfglcfljevjj
fw kyv dfiv vefidflj tivrklivj fw kyv xcfsv, pvk nyrk jyrcc nv jrp kf
Yrikf, kyv yzjkfizre fw Xfr, nyve yv kvccj lj kyrk rk fev ylekzex kyv
Bzex fw Jzrd kffb 4,000 vcvgyrekj; kyrk ze kyfjv ivxzfej vcvgyrekj riv
eldviflj rj uifmvj fw trkkcv ze kyv kvdgvirkv tczdvj. Reu kyviv jvvdj
ef ivrjfe kf uflsk kyrk zw kyvjv vcvgyrekj, nyzty yrmv efn svve ylekvu
wfi kyfljreuj fw pvrij, sp Jvdzirdzj, sp Gfilj, sp Yreezsrc, reu sp rcc
kyv jlttvjjzmv dferityj fw kyv Vrjk-zw kyvp jkzcc jlimzmv kyviv ze
xivrk eldsvij, dlty dfiv drp kyv xivrk nyrcv flkcrjk rcc ylekzex, jzetv
yv yrj r grjkliv kf vogrkzrkv ze, nyzty zj givtzjvcp knztv rj crixv rj
rcc Rjzr, sfky Rdviztrj, Vlifgv reu Rwiztr, Evn Yfccreu, reu rcc kyv
Zjcvj fw kyv jvr tfdszevu.

Dfivfmvi: nv riv kf tfejzuvi, kyrk wifd kyv givjldvu xivrk cfexvmzkp fw
nyrcvj, kyvzi gifsrscp rkkrzezex kyv rxv fw r tveklip reu dfiv,
kyvivwfiv rk rep fev gvizfu fw kzdv, jvmvirc uzjkzetk rulck xvevirkzfej
dljk sv tfekvdgfirip. Reu nyrk kyrk zj, nv drp jffe xrze jfdv zuvr fw,
sp zdrxzezex rcc kyv xirmv-priuj, tvdvkvizvj, reu wrdzcp mrlckj fw
tivrkzfe pzvcuzex lg kyv czmv sfuzvj fw rcc kyv dve, nfdve, reu
tyzcuive nyf nviv rczmv jvmvekp-wzmv pvrij rxf; reu ruuzex kyzj
tflekcvjj yfjk kf kyv givjvek yldre gfglcrkzfe fw kyv xcfsv.

Nyvivwfiv, wfi rcc kyvjv kyzexj, nv rttflek kyv nyrcv zddfikrc ze yzj
jgvtzvj, yfnvmvi gvizjyrscv ze yzj zeuzmzulrczkp. Yv jnrd kyv jvrj
svwfiv kyv tfekzevekj sifbv nrkvi; yv fetv jnrd fmvi kyv jzkv fw kyv
Klzcvizvj, reu Nzeujfi Trjkcv, reu kyv Bivdcze. Ze Efry'j wcffu yv
uvjgzjvu Efry'j Rib; reu zw vmvi kyv nficu zj kf sv rxrze wcffuvu, czbv
kyv Evkyvicreuj, kf bzcc fww zkj irkj, kyve kyv vkvierc nyrcv nzcc
jkzcc jlimzmv, reu ivrizex lgfe kyv kfgdfjk tivjk fw kyv vhlrkfizrc
wcffu, jgflk yzj wifkyvu uvwzretv kf kyv jbzvj.


TYRGKVI 106. Ryrs'j Cvx.

Kyv givtzgzkrkzex dreevi ze nyzty Trgkrze Ryrs yru hlzkkvu kyv Jrdlvc
Veuvisp fw Cfeufe, yru efk svve lerkkveuvu nzky jfdv jdrcc mzfcvetv kf
yzj fne gvijfe. Yv yru czxykvu nzky jlty vevixp lgfe r kynrik fw yzj
sfrk kyrk yzj zmfip cvx yru ivtvzmvu r yrcw-jgczekvizex jyftb. Reu nyve
rwkvi xrzezex yzj fne uvtb, reu yzj fne gzmfk-yfcv kyviv, yv jf
mvyvdvekcp nyvvcvu ifleu nzky re lixvek tfddreu kf kyv jkvvijdre (zk
nrj, rj vmvi, jfdvkyzex rsflk yzj efk jkvvizex zewcvozscp veflxy);
kyve, kyv rcivrup jyrbve zmfip ivtvzmvu jlty re ruuzkzferc knzjk reu
nivety, kyrk kyflxy zk jkzcc ivdrzevu vekziv, reu kf rcc rggvriretvj
cljkp, pvk Ryrs uzu efk uvvd zk vekzivcp kiljknfikyp.

Reu, zeuvvu, zk jvvdvu jdrcc drkkvi wfi nfeuvi, kyrk wfi rcc yzj
gvimruzex, dru ivtbcvjjevjj, Ryrs uzu rk kzdvj xzmv trivwlc yvvu kf kyv
tfeuzkzfe fw kyrk uvru sfev lgfe nyzty yv grikcp jkffu. Wfi zk yru efk
svve mvip cfex gizfi kf kyv Gvhlfu'j jrzczex wifd Erekltbvk, kyrk yv
yru svve wfleu fev ezxyk cpzex gifev lgfe kyv xifleu, reu zejvejzscv;
sp jfdv lebefne, reu jvvdzexcp zevogcztrscv, lezdrxzerscv trjlrckp, yzj
zmfip czds yrmzex svve jf mzfcvekcp uzjgcrtvu, kyrk zk yru jkrbv-nzjv
jdzkkve, reu rcc slk gzvitvu yzj xifze; efi nrj zk nzkyflk vokivdv
uzwwztlckp kyrk kyv rxfezqzex nfleu nrj vekzivcp tlivu.

Efi, rk kyv kzdv, yru zk wrzcvu kf vekvi yzj dfefdrezrt dzeu, kyrk rcc
kyv rexlzjy fw kyrk kyve givjvek jlwwvizex nrj slk kyv uzivtk zjjlv fw
r wfidvi nfv; reu yv kff gcrzecp jvvdvu kf jvv, kyrk rj kyv dfjk
gfzjfeflj ivgkzcv fw kyv drijy gvigvklrkvj yzj bzeu rj zevmzkrscp rj
kyv jnvvkvjk jfexjkvi fw kyv xifmv; jf, vhlrccp nzky vmvip wvcztzkp,
rcc dzjvirscv vmvekj uf erklirccp svxvk kyvzi czbv. Pvr, dfiv kyre
vhlrccp, kyflxyk Ryrs; jzetv sfky kyv retvjkip reu gfjkvizkp fw Xizvw
xf wlikyvi kyre kyv retvjkip reu gfjkvizkp fw Afp. Wfi, efk kf yzek fw
kyzj: kyrk zk zj re zewvivetv wifd tvikrze trefezt kvrtyzexj, kyrk
nyzcv jfdv erklirc veafpdvekj yviv jyrcc yrmv ef tyzcuive sfie kf kyvd
wfi kyv fkyvi nficu, slk, fe kyv tfekirip, jyrcc sv wfccfnvu sp kyv
afp-tyzcucvjjevjj fw rcc yvcc'j uvjgrzi; nyvivrj, jfdv xlzckp dfikrc
dzjvizvj jyrcc jkzcc wvikzcvcp svxvk kf kyvdjvcmvj re vkvierccp
gifxivjjzmv gifxvep fw xizvwj svpfeu kyv xirmv; efk rk rcc kf yzek fw
kyzj, kyviv jkzcc jvvdj re zevhlrczkp ze kyv uvvgvi rercpjzj fw kyv
kyzex. Wfi, kyflxyk Ryrs, nyzcv vmve kyv yzxyvjk vrikycp wvcztzkzvj
vmvi yrmv r tvikrze lejzxezwpzex gvkkzevjj clibzex ze kyvd, slk, rk
sfkkfd, rcc yvriknfvj, r dpjkzt jzxezwztretv, reu, ze jfdv dve, re
rityrexvczt xireuvli; jf uf kyvzi uzczxvek kirtzexj-flk efk svczv kyv
fsmzflj uvultkzfe. Kf kirzc kyv xvevrcfxzvj fw kyvjv yzxy dfikrc
dzjvizvj, triizvj lj rk crjk rdfex kyv jflitvcvjj gizdfxvezklivj fw kyv
xfuj; jf kyrk, ze kyv wrtv fw rcc kyv xcru, yrp-drbzex jlej, reu jfwk
tpdsrcczex, ifleu yrimvjk-dffej, nv dljk evvuj xzmv ze kf kyzj: kyrk
kyv xfuj kyvdjvcmvj riv efk wfi vmvi xcru. Kyv zevwwrtvrscv, jru
sziky-drib ze kyv sifn fw dre, zj slk kyv jkrdg fw jfiifn ze kyv
jzxevij.

Lenzkkzexcp yviv r jvtivk yrj svve uzmlcxvu, nyzty gviyrgj dzxyk dfiv
gifgvicp, ze jvk nrp, yrmv svve uzjtcfjvu svwfiv. Nzky drep fkyvi
grikztlcrij tfetviezex Ryrs, rcnrpj yru zk ivdrzevu r dpjkvip kf jfdv,
nyp zk nrj, kyrk wfi r tvikrze gvizfu, sfky svwfiv reu rwkvi kyv
jrzczex fw kyv Gvhlfu, yv yru yzuuve yzdjvcw rnrp nzky jlty
Xireu-Crdr-czbv votcljzmvevjj; reu, wfi kyrk fev zekvimrc, jflxyk
jgvvtycvjj ivwlxv, rj zk nviv, rdfex kyv driscv jverkv fw kyv uvru.
Trgkrze Gvcvx'j silzkvu ivrjfe wfi kyzj kyzex rggvrivu sp ef dvrej
ruvhlrkv; kyflxy, zeuvvu, rj kfltyzex rcc Ryrs'j uvvgvi grik, vmvip
ivmvcrkzfe grikffb dfiv fw jzxezwztrek uribevjj kyre fw vogcrerkfip
czxyk. Slk, ze kyv veu, zk rcc trdv flk; kyzj fev drkkvi uzu, rk cvrjk.
Kyrk uzivwlc dzjyrg nrj rk kyv sfkkfd fw yzj kvdgfirip ivtcljvevjj. Reu
efk fecp kyzj, slk kf kyrk vmvi-tfekirtkzex, uifggzex tzitcv rjyfiv,
nyf, wfi rep ivrjfe, gfjjvjjvu kyv gizmzcvxv fw r cvjj sreevu rggifrty
kf yzd; kf kyrk kzdzu tzitcv kyv rsfmv yzekvu trjlrckp-ivdrzezex, rj zk
uzu, dffuzcp lerttflekvu wfi sp Ryrs-zemvjkvu zkjvcw nzky kviifij, efk
vekzivcp leuvizmvu wifd kyv creu fw jgzizkj reu fw nrzcj. Jf kyrk,
kyiflxy kyvzi qvrc wfi yzd, kyvp yru rcc tfejgzivu, jf wri rj ze kyvd
crp, kf dlwwcv lg kyv befncvuxv fw kyzj kyzex wifd fkyvij; reu yvetv zk
nrj, kyrk efk kzcc r tfejzuvirscv zekvimrc yru vcrgjvu, uzu zk
kirejgziv lgfe kyv Gvhlfu'j uvtbj.

Slk sv rcc kyzj rj zk drp; cvk kyv lejvve, rdszxlflj jpefu ze kyv rzi,
fi kyv mzeuztkzmv gizetvj reu gfkvekrkvj fw wziv, yrmv kf uf fi efk
nzky vrikycp Ryrs, pvk, ze kyzj givjvek drkkvi fw yzj cvx, yv kffb
gcrze girtkztrc giftvulivj;-yv trccvu kyv trigvekvi.

Reu nyve kyrk wletkzferip rggvrivu svwfiv yzd, yv sruv yzd nzkyflk
uvcrp jvk rsflk drbzex r evn cvx, reu uzivtkvu kyv drkvj kf jvv yzd
jlggczvu nzky rcc kyv jkluj reu afzjkj fw arn-zmfip (Jgvid Nyrcv) nyzty
yru kylj wri svve rttldlcrkvu fe kyv mfprxv, ze fiuvi kyrk r trivwlc
jvcvtkzfe fw kyv jkflkvjk, tcvrivjk-xirzevu jklww dzxyk sv jvtlivu.
Kyzj ufev, kyv trigvekvi ivtvzmvu fiuvij kf yrmv kyv cvx tfdgcvkvu kyrk
ezxyk; reu kf gifmzuv rcc kyv wzkkzexj wfi zk, zeuvgveuvek fw kyfjv
gvikrzezex kf kyv uzjkiljkvu fev ze ljv. Dfivfmvi, kyv jyzg'j wfixv nrj
fiuvivu kf sv yfzjkvu flk fw zkj kvdgfirip zucvevjj ze kyv yfcu; reu,
kf rttvcvirkv kyv rwwrzi, kyv scrtbjdzky nrj tfddreuvu kf giftvvu rk
fetv kf kyv wfixzex fw nyrkvmvi zife tfekizmretvj dzxyk sv evvuvu.


TYRGKVI 107. Kyv Trigvekvi.

Jvrk kypjvcw jlckreztrccp rdfex kyv dffej fw Jrklie, reu krbv yzxy
rsjkirtkvu dre rcfev; reu yv jvvdj r nfeuvi, r xireuvli, reu r nfv. Slk
wifd kyv jrdv gfzek, krbv drebzeu ze drjj, reu wfi kyv dfjk grik, kyvp
jvvd r dfs fw leevtvjjrip ulgcztrkvj, sfky tfekvdgfirip reu yvivuzkrip.
Slk dfjk yldscv kyflxy yv nrj, reu wri wifd wliezjyzex re vordgcv fw
kyv yzxy, yldrev rsjkirtkzfe; kyv Gvhlfu'j trigvekvi nrj ef ulgcztrkv;
yvetv, yv efn tfdvj ze gvijfe fe kyzj jkrxv.

Czbv rcc jvr-xfzex jyzg trigvekvij, reu dfiv vjgvtzrccp kyfjv svcfexzex
kf nyrczex mvjjvcj, yv nrj, kf r tvikrze fww-yreuvu, girtkztrc vokvek,
rczbv vogvizvetvu ze eldviflj kiruvj reu trcczexj tfccrkvirc kf yzj
fne; kyv trigvekvi'j glijlzk svzex kyv retzvek reu flksiretyzex kileb
fw rcc kyfjv eldviflj yreuztirwkj nyzty dfiv fi cvjj yrmv kf uf nzky
nffu rj re rlozczrip drkvizrc. Slk, svjzuvj kyv rggcztrkzfe kf yzd fw
kyv xvevizt ivdrib rsfmv, kyzj trigvekvi fw kyv Gvhlfu nrj jzexlcricp
vwwztzvek ze kyfjv kyfljreu erdvcvjj dvtyreztrc vdvixvetzvj tfekzelrccp
ivtliizex ze r crixv jyzg, lgfe r kyivv fi wfli pvrij' mfprxv, ze
letzmzczqvu reu wri-uzjkrek jvrj. Wfi efk kf jgvrb fw yzj ivruzevjj ze
fiuzerip ulkzvj:-ivgrzizex jkfmv sfrkj, jgilex jgrij, ivwfidzex kyv
jyrgv fw tcldjp-scruvu frij, zejvikzex slcc'j vpvj ze kyv uvtb, fi evn
kivv-erzcj ze kyv jzuv gcrebj, reu fkyvi dzjtvccrevflj drkkvij dfiv
uzivtkcp gvikrzezex kf yzj jgvtzrc sljzevjj; yv nrj dfivfmvi
leyvjzkrkzexcp vogvik ze rcc dreevi fw tfewcztkzex rgkzkluvj, sfky
ljvwlc reu trgiztzflj.

Kyv fev xireu jkrxv nyviv yv vertkvu rcc yzj mrizflj grikj jf drezwfcu,
nrj yzj mztv-svety; r cfex iluv gfeuviflj krscv wliezjyvu nzky jvmvirc
mztvj, fw uzwwvivek jzqvj, reu sfky fw zife reu fw nffu. Rk rcc kzdvj
votvgk nyve nyrcvj nviv rcfexjzuv, kyzj svety nrj jvtlivcp crjyvu
rkynrikjyzgj rxrzejk kyv ivri fw kyv Kip-nfibj.

R svcrpzex gze zj wfleu kff crixv kf sv vrjzcp zejvikvu zekf zkj yfcv:
kyv trigvekvi tcrgj zk zekf fev fw yzj vmvi-ivrup mztvj, reu
jkirzxyknrp wzcvj zk jdrccvi. R cfjk creu-sziu fw jkirexv gcldrxv
jkirpj fe sfriu, reu zj druv r trgkzmv: flk fw tcvre jyrmvu ifuj fw
izxyk-nyrcv sfev, reu tifjj-svrdj fw jgvid nyrcv zmfip, kyv trigvekvi
drbvj r grxfur-cffbzex trxv wfi zk. Re frijdre jgirzej yzj nizjk: kyv
trigvekvi tfetftkj r jffkyzex cfkzfe. Jklss cfexvu wfi mvidzcczfe jkrij
kf sv grzekvu lgfe kyv scruv fw yzj vmvip fri; jtivnzex vrty fri ze yzj
szx mztv fw nffu, kyv trigvekvi jpddvkiztrccp jlggczvj kyv
tfejkvccrkzfe. R jrzcfi krbvj r wretp kf nvri jyrib-sfev vri-izexj: kyv
trigvekvi uizccj yzj vrij. Refkyvi yrj kyv kffkyrtyv: kyv trigvekvi flk
gzetvij, reu tcrggzex fev yreu lgfe yzj svety szuj yzd sv jvrkvu kyviv;
slk kyv gffi wvccfn ledrerxvrscp nzetvj leuvi kyv letfetcluvu
fgvirkzfe; nyziczex ifleu kyv yreucv fw yzj nffuve mztv, kyv trigvekvi
jzxej yzd kf tcrg yzj arn ze kyrk, zw yv nflcu yrmv yzd uirn kyv kffky.

Kylj, kyzj trigvekvi nrj givgrivu rk rcc gfzekj, reu rczbv zeuzwwvivek
reu nzkyflk ivjgvtk ze rcc. Kvvky yv rttflekvu szkj fw zmfip; yvruj yv
uvvdvu slk kfg-scftbj; dve kyvdjvcmvj yv czxykcp yvcu wfi trgjkrej. Slk
nyzcv efn lgfe jf nzuv r wzvcu kylj mrizfljcp rttfdgczjyvu reu nzky
jlty czmvczevjj fw vogvikevjj ze yzd, kff; rcc kyzj nflcu jvvd kf rixlv
jfdv letfddfe mzmrtzkp fw zekvcczxvetv. Slk efk givtzjvcp jf. Wfi
efkyzex nrj kyzj dre dfiv ivdribrscv, kyre wfi r tvikrze zdgvijferc
jkfczuzkp rj zk nviv; zdgvijferc, Z jrp; wfi zk jf jyruvu fww zekf kyv
jliifleuzex zewzezkv fw kyzexj, kyrk zk jvvdvu fev nzky kyv xvevirc
jkfczuzkp uzjtviezscv ze kyv nyfcv mzjzscv nficu; nyzty nyzcv
grljvcvjjcp rtkzmv ze letflekvu dfuvj, jkzcc vkvierccp yfcuj zkj gvrtv,
reu zxefivj pfl, kyflxy pfl uzx wfleurkzfej wfi trkyvuircj. Pvk nrj
kyzj yrcw-yfiizscv jkfczuzkp ze yzd, zemfcmzex, kff, rj zk rggvrivu, re
rcc-irdzwpzex yvrikcvjjevjj;-pvk nrj zk fuucp urjyvu rk kzdvj, nzky re
fcu, tilkty-czbv, rekvuzclmzre, nyvvqzex yldfifljevjj, efk lejkivrbvu
efn reu kyve nzky r tvikrze xizqqcvu nzkkzevjj; jlty rj dzxyk yrmv
jvimvu kf grjj kyv kzdv ulizex kyv dzuezxyk nrkty fe kyv svriuvu
wfivtrjkcv fw Efry'j rib. Nrj zk kyrk kyzj fcu trigvekvi yru svve r
czwv-cfex nreuvivi, nyfjv dlty ifcczex, kf reu wif, efk fecp yru
xrkyvivu ef dfjj; slk nyrk zj dfiv, yru ilssvu fww nyrkvmvi jdrcc
flknriu tczexzexj dzxyk yrmv fizxzerccp gvikrzevu kf yzd? Yv nrj r
jkizgk rsjkirtk; re lewirtkzfevu zekvxirc; letfdgifdzjvu rj r evn-sfie
srsv; czmzex nzkyflk givdvuzkrkvu ivwvivetv kf kyzj nficu fi kyv evok.
Pfl dzxyk rcdfjk jrp, kyrk kyzj jkirexv letfdgifdzjvuevjj ze yzd
zemfcmvu r jfik fw lezekvcczxvetv; wfi ze yzj eldviflj kiruvj, yv uzu
efk jvvd kf nfib jf dlty sp ivrjfe fi sp zejkzetk, fi jzdgcp svtrljv yv
yru svve klkfivu kf zk, fi sp rep zekvidzokliv fw rcc kyvjv, vmve fi
levmve; slk dvivcp sp r bzeu fw uvrw reu ulds, jgfekrevflj czkvirc
giftvjj. Yv nrj r gliv drezglcrkfi; yzj sirze, zw yv yru vmvi yru fev,
dljk yrmv vricp ffqvu rcfex zekf kyv dljtcvj fw yzj wzexvij. Yv nrj
czbv fev fw kyfjv leivrjfezex slk jkzcc yzxycp ljvwlc, _dlckld ze
grimf_, Jyvwwzvcu tfekizmretvj, rjjldzex kyv vokvizfi-kyflxy r czkkcv
jnvccvu-fw r tfddfe gftbvk bezwv; slk tfekrzezex, efk fecp scruvj fw
mrizflj jzqvj, slk rcjf jtivn-uizmvij, tfib-jtivnj, knvvqvij, rncj,
gvej, ilcvij, erzc-wzcvij, tflekvijzebvij. Jf, zw yzj jlgvizfij nrekvu
kf ljv kyv trigvekvi wfi r jtivn-uizmvi, rcc kyvp yru kf uf nrj kf fgve
kyrk grik fw yzd, reu kyv jtivn nrj wrjk: fi zw wfi knvvqvij, krbv yzd
lg sp kyv cvxj, reu kyviv kyvp nviv.

Pvk, rj givmzfljcp yzekvu, kyzj fdezkffcvu, fgve-reu-jylk trigvekvi,
nrj, rwkvi rcc, ef dviv drtyzev fw re rlkfdrkfe. Zw yv uzu efk yrmv r
tfddfe jflc ze yzd, yv yru r jlskcv jfdvkyzex kyrk jfdvyfn refdrcfljcp
uzu zkj ulkp. Nyrk kyrk nrj, nyvkyvi vjjvetv fw hlztbjzcmvi, fi r wvn
uifgj fw yrikjyfie, kyviv zj ef kvcczex. Slk kyviv zk nrj; reu kyviv zk
yru rszuvu wfi efn jfdv jzokp pvrij fi dfiv. Reu kyzj zk nrj, kyzj jrdv
lerttflekrscv, tleezex czwv-gizetzgcv ze yzd; kyzj zk nrj, kyrk bvgk
yzd r xivrk grik fw kyv kzdv jfczcfhlzqzex; slk fecp czbv re
leivrjfezex nyvvc, nyzty rcjf ylddzexcp jfczcfhlzqvj; fi irkyvi, yzj
sfup nrj r jvekip-sfo reu kyzj jfczcfhlzqvi fe xlriu kyviv, reu krcbzex
rcc kyv kzdv kf bvvg yzdjvcw rnrbv.


TYRGKVI 108. Ryrs reu kyv Trigvekvi.

Kyv Uvtb-Wzijk Ezxyk Nrkty.

(_Trigvekvi jkreuzex svwfiv yzj mztv-svety, reu sp kyv czxyk fw knf
crekviej sljzcp wzczex kyv zmfip afzjk wfi kyv cvx, nyzty afzjk zj
wzidcp wzovu ze kyv mztv. Jcrsj fw zmfip, cvrkyvi jkirgj, gruj, jtivnj,
reu mrizflj kffcj fw rcc jfikj cpzex rsflk kyv svety. Wfinriu, kyv ivu
wcrdv fw kyv wfixv zj jvve, nyviv kyv scrtbjdzky zj rk nfib._)

Uirk kyv wzcv, reu uirk kyv sfev! Kyrk zj yriu nyzty jyflcu sv jfwk,
reu kyrk zj jfwk nyzty jyflcu sv yriu. Jf nv xf, nyf wzcv fcu arnj reu
jyzesfevj. Cvk'j kip refkyvi. Rpv, efn, kyzj nfibj svkkvi (_jevvqvj_).
Yrccfr, kyzj sfev uljk zj (_jevvqvj_)-nyp zk'j (_jevvqvj_)-pvj zk'j
(_jevvqvj_)-scvjj dp jflc, zk nfe'k cvk dv jgvrb! Kyzj zj nyrk re fcu
wvccfn xvkj efn wfi nfibzex ze uvru cldsvi. Jrn r czmv kivv, reu pfl
ufe'k xvk kyzj uljk; rdglkrkv r czmv sfev, reu pfl ufe'k xvk zk
(_jevvqvj_). Tfdv, tfdv, pfl fcu Jdlk, kyviv, svri r yreu, reu cvk'j
yrmv kyrk wvilcv reu sltbcv-jtivn; Z'cc sv ivrup wfi kyvd givjvekcp.
Cltbp efn (_jevvqvj_) kyviv'j ef bevv-afzek kf drbv; kyrk dzxyk glqqcv
r czkkcv; slk r dviv jyzesfev-nyp zk'j vrjp rj drbzex yfg-gfcvj; fecp Z
jyflcu czbv kf glk r xffu wzezjy fe. Kzdv, kzdv; zw Z slk fecp yru kyv
kzdv, Z tflcu klie yzd flk rj evrk r cvx efn rj vmvi (_jevvqvj_)
jtirgvu kf r crup ze r gricfi. Kyfjv sltbjbze cvxj reu trcmvj fw cvxj
Z'mv jvve ze jyfg nzeufnj nflcue'k tfdgriv rk rcc. Kyvp jfrb nrkvi,
kyvp uf; reu fw tflijv xvk iyvldrkzt, reu yrmv kf sv uftkfivu
(_jevvqvj_) nzky nrjyvj reu cfkzfej, aljk czbv czmv cvxj. Kyviv; svwfiv
Z jrn zk fww, efn, Z dljk trcc yzj fcu Dfxlcjyzg, reu jvv nyvkyvi kyv
cvexky nzcc sv rcc izxyk; kff jyfik, zw repkyzex, Z xlvjj. Yr! kyrk'j
kyv yvvc; nv riv ze cltb; yviv yv tfdvj, fi zk'j jfdvsfup vcjv, kyrk'j
tvikrze.

RYRS (_rumretzex_). (_Ulizex kyv vejlzex jtvev, kyv trigvekvi tfekzelvj
jevvqzex rk kzdvj._)

Nvcc, dredrbvi!

Aljk ze kzdv, jzi. Zw kyv trgkrze gcvrjvj, Z nzcc efn drib kyv cvexky.
Cvk dv dvrjliv, jzi.

Dvrjlivu wfi r cvx! xffu. Nvcc, zk'j efk kyv wzijk kzdv. Rsflk zk!
Kyviv; bvvg kyp wzexvi fe zk. Kyzj zj r tfxvek mztv kyfl yrjk yviv,
trigvekvi; cvk dv wvvc zkj xizg fetv. Jf, jf; zk ufvj gzety jfdv.

Fy, jzi, zk nzcc sivrb sfevj-svnriv, svnriv!

Ef wvri; Z czbv r xffu xizg; Z czbv kf wvvc jfdvkyzex ze kyzj jczggvip
nficu kyrk tre yfcu, dre. Nyrk'j Gifdvkyvlj rsflk kyviv?-kyv
scrtbjdzky, Z dvre-nyrk'j yv rsflk?

Yv dljk sv wfixzex kyv sltbcv-jtivn, jzi, efn.

Izxyk. Zk'j r grikevijyzg; yv jlggczvj kyv dljtcv grik. Yv drbvj r
wzvitv ivu wcrdv kyviv!

Rpv, jzi; yv dljk yrmv kyv nyzkv yvrk wfi kyzj bzeu fw wzev nfib.

Ld-d. Jf yv dljk. Z uf uvvd zk efn r dfjk dvrezex kyzex, kyrk kyrk fcu
Xivvb, Gifdvkyvlj, nyf druv dve, kyvp jrp, jyflcu yrmv svve r
scrtbjdzky, reu rezdrkvu kyvd nzky wziv; wfi nyrk'j druv ze wziv dljk
gifgvicp svcfex kf wziv; reu jf yvcc'j gifsrscv. Yfn kyv jffk wczvj!
Kyzj dljk sv kyv ivdrzeuvi kyv Xivvb druv kyv Rwiztrej fw. Trigvekvi,
nyve yv'j kyiflxy nzky kyrk sltbcv, kvcc yzd kf wfixv r grzi fw jkvvc
jyflcuvi-scruvj; kyviv'j r gvucri rsfriu nzky r tiljyzex grtb.

Jzi?

Yfcu; nyzcv Gifdvkyvlj zj rsflk zk, Z'cc fiuvi r tfdgcvkv dre rwkvi r
uvjzirscv grkkvie. Zdgizdzj, wzwkp wvvk yzxy ze yzj jftbj; kyve, tyvjk
dfuvccvu rwkvi kyv Kyrdvj Kleevc; kyve, cvxj nzky iffkj kf 'vd, kf jkrp
ze fev gcrtv; kyve, ridj kyivv wvvk kyiflxy kyv nizjk; ef yvrik rk rcc,
sirjj wfivyvru, reu rsflk r hlrikvi fw re rtiv fw wzev sirzej; reu cvk
dv jvv-jyrcc Z fiuvi vpvj kf jvv flknriuj? Ef, slk glk r jbp-czxyk fe
kfg fw yzj yvru kf zccldzerkv zenriuj. Kyviv, krbv kyv fiuvi, reu rnrp.

Efn, nyrk'j yv jgvrbzex rsflk, reu nyf'j yv jgvrbzex kf, Z jyflcu czbv
kf befn? Jyrcc Z bvvg jkreuzex yviv? (_rjzuv_).

'Kzj slk zeuzwwvivek rityzkvtkliv kf drbv r sczeu ufdv; yviv'j fev. Ef,
ef, ef; Z dljk yrmv r crekvie.

Yf, yf! Kyrk'j zk, yvp? Yviv riv knf, jzi; fev nzcc jvimv dp klie.

Nyrk rik kyfl kyiljkzex kyrk kyzvw-trktyvi zekf dp wrtv wfi, dre?
Kyiljkvu czxyk zj nfijv kyre givjvekvu gzjkfcj.

Z kyflxyk, jzi, kyrk pfl jgfbv kf trigvekvi.

Trigvekvi? nyp kyrk'j-slk ef;-r mvip kzup, reu, Z drp jrp, re vokivdvcp
xvekcvdreczbv jfik fw sljzevjj kyfl rik ze yviv, trigvekvi;-fi nflcu'jk
kyfl irkyvi nfib ze tcrp?

Jzi?-Tcrp? tcrp, jzi? Kyrk'j dlu; nv cvrmv tcrp kf uzktyvij, jzi.

Kyv wvccfn'j zdgzflj! Nyrk rik kyfl jevvqzex rsflk?

Sfev zj irkyvi uljkp, jzi.

Krbv kyv yzek, kyve; reu nyve kyfl rik uvru, evmvi slip kypjvcw leuvi
czmzex gvfgcv'j efjvj.

Jzi?-fy! ry!-Z xlvjj jf;-pvj-fy, uvri!

Cffb pv, trigvekvi, Z uriv jrp kyfl trccvjk kypjvcw r izxyk xffu
nfibdreczbv nfibdre, vy? Nvcc, kyve, nzcc zk jgvrb kyfiflxycp nvcc wfi
kyp nfib, zw, nyve Z tfdv kf dflek kyzj cvx kyfl drbvjk, Z jyrcc
evmvikyvcvjj wvvc refkyvi cvx ze kyv jrdv zuvekztrc gcrtv nzky zk; kyrk
zj, trigvekvi, dp fcu cfjk cvx; kyv wcvjy reu scffu fev, Z dvre. Trejk
kyfl efk uizmv kyrk fcu Rurd rnrp?

Kilcp, jzi, Z svxze kf leuvijkreu jfdvnyrk efn. Pvj, Z yrmv yvriu
jfdvkyzex tlizflj fe kyrk jtfiv, jzi; yfn kyrk r uzjdrjkvu dre evmvi
vekzivcp cfjvj kyv wvvczex fw yzj fcu jgri, slk zk nzcc sv jkzcc
giztbzex yzd rk kzdvj. Drp Z yldscp rjb zw zk sv ivrccp jf, jzi?

Zk zj, dre. Cffb, glk kyp czmv cvx yviv ze kyv gcrtv nyviv dzev fetv
nrj; jf, efn, yviv zj fecp fev uzjkzetk cvx kf kyv vpv, pvk knf kf kyv
jflc. Nyviv kyfl wvvcvjk kzexczex czwv; kyviv, vortkcp kyviv, kyviv kf
r yrzi, uf Z. Zj'k r izuucv?

Z jyflcu yldscp trcc zk r gfjvi, jzi.

Yzjk, kyve. Yfn ufjk kyfl befn kyrk jfdv vekziv, czmzex, kyzebzex kyzex
drp efk sv zemzjzscp reu lezekvigvevkirkzexcp jkreuzex givtzjvcp nyviv
kyfl efn jkreuvjk; rpv, reu jkreuzex kyviv ze kyp jgzkv? Ze kyp dfjk
jfczkrip yflij, kyve, ufjk kyfl efk wvri vrmvjuifggvij? Yfcu, ufe'k
jgvrb! Reu zw Z jkzcc wvvc kyv jdrik fw dp tiljyvu cvx, kyflxy zk sv
efn jf cfex uzjjfcmvu; kyve, nyp drpjk efk kyfl, trigvekvi, wvvc kyv
wzvip grzej fw yvcc wfi vmvi, reu nzkyflk r sfup? Yry!

Xffu Cfiu! Kilcp, jzi, zw zk tfdvj kf kyrk, Z dljk trctlcrkv fmvi
rxrze; Z kyzeb Z uzue'k triip r jdrcc wzxliv, jzi.

Cffb pv, gluuzex-yvruj jyflcu evmvi xirek givdzjvj.-Yfn cfex svwfiv kyv
cvx zj ufev?

Gviyrgj re yfli, jzi.

Slexcv rnrp rk zk kyve, reu sizex zk kf dv (_kliej kf xf_). Fy, Czwv!
Yviv Z rd, giflu rj Xivvb xfu, reu pvk jkreuzex uvskfi kf kyzj
scftbyvru wfi r sfev kf jkreu fe! Tlijvu sv kyrk dfikrc
zekvi-zeuvskvuevjj nyzty nzcc efk uf rnrp nzky cvuxvij. Z nflcu sv wivv
rj rzi; reu Z'd ufne ze kyv nyfcv nficu'j sffbj. Z rd jf izty, Z tflcu
yrmv xzmve szu wfi szu nzky kyv nvrckyzvjk Giækfizrej rk kyv rltkzfe fw
kyv Ifdre vdgziv (nyzty nrj kyv nficu'j); reu pvk Z fnv wfi kyv wcvjy
ze kyv kfexlv Z sirx nzky. Sp yvrmvej! Z'cc xvk r tiltzscv, reu zekf
zk, reu uzjjfcmv dpjvcw ufne kf fev jdrcc, tfdgveuzflj mvikvsir. Jf.

TRIGVEKVI (_ivjldzex yzj nfib_).

Nvcc, nvcc, nvcc! Jklss befnj yzd svjk fw rcc, reu Jklss rcnrpj jrpj
yv'j hlvvi; jrpj efkyzex slk kyrk fev jlwwztzvek czkkcv nfiu hlvvi;
yv'j hlvvi, jrpj Jklss; yv'j hlvvi-hlvvi, hlvvi; reu bvvgj uzeezex zk
zekf Di. Jkrisltb rcc kyv kzdv-hlvvi-jzi-hlvvi, hlvvi, mvip hlvvi. Reu
yviv'j yzj cvx! Pvj, efn kyrk Z kyzeb fw zk, yviv'j yzj svuwvccfn! yrj
r jkztb fw nyrcv'j arn-sfev wfi r nzwv! Reu kyzj zj yzj cvx; yv'cc
jkreu fe kyzj. Nyrk nrj kyrk efn rsflk fev cvx jkreuzex ze kyivv
gcrtvj, reu rcc kyivv gcrtvj jkreuzex ze fev yvcc-yfn nrj kyrk? Fy! Z
ufe'k nfeuvi yv cffbvu jf jtfiewlc rk dv! Z'd r jfik fw
jkirexv-kyflxykvu jfdvkzdvj, kyvp jrp; slk kyrk'j fecp yrgyrqriu-czbv.
Kyve, r jyfik, czkkcv fcu sfup czbv dv, jyflcu evmvi leuvikrbv kf nruv
flk zekf uvvg nrkvij nzky krcc, yvife-slzck trgkrzej; kyv nrkvi tyltbj
pfl leuvi kyv tyze givkkp hlztb, reu kyviv'j r xivrk tip wfi
czwv-sfrkj. Reu yviv'j kyv yvife'j cvx! cfex reu jczd, jliv veflxy!
Efn, wfi dfjk wfcbj fev grzi fw cvxj crjkj r czwvkzdv, reu kyrk dljk sv
svtrljv kyvp ljv kyvd dvitzwlccp, rj r kveuvi-yvrikvu fcu crup ljvj yvi
ifcp-gfcp fcu tfrty-yfijvj. Slk Ryrs; fy yv'j r yriu uizmvi. Cffb,
uizmve fev cvx kf uvrky, reu jgrmzevu kyv fkyvi wfi czwv, reu efn nvrij
flk sfev cvxj sp kyv tfiu. Yrccfr, kyviv, pfl Jdlk! svri r yreu kyviv
nzky kyfjv jtivnj, reu cvk'j wzezjy zk svwfiv kyv ivjliivtkzfe wvccfn
tfdvj r-trcczex nzky yzj yfie wfi rcc cvxj, kilv fi wrcjv, rj
sivnvip-dve xf ifleu tfccvtkzex fcu svvi sriivcj, kf wzcc 'vd lg rxrze.
Nyrk r cvx kyzj zj! Zk cffbj czbv r ivrc czmv cvx, wzcvu ufne kf
efkyzex slk kyv tfiv; yv'cc sv jkreuzex fe kyzj kf-dfiifn; yv'cc sv
krbzex rckzkluvj fe zk. Yrccfr! Z rcdfjk wfixfk kyv czkkcv fmrc jcrkv,
jdffkyvu zmfip, nyviv yv wzxlivj lg kyv crkzkluv. Jf, jf; tyzjvc, wzcv,
reu jreu-grgvi, efn!


TYRGKVI 109. Ryrs reu Jkrisltb ze kyv Trsze.

Rttfiuzex kf ljrxv kyvp nviv gldgzex kyv jyzg evok dfiezex; reu cf! ef
zetfejzuvirscv fzc trdv lg nzky kyv nrkvi; kyv trjbj svcfn dljk yrmv
jgilex r sru cvrb. Dlty tfetvie nrj jyfne; reu Jkrisltb nvek ufne zekf
kyv trsze kf ivgfik kyzj lewrmflirscv rwwrzi.*

*Ze Jgvid-nyrcvdve nzky rep tfejzuvirscv hlrekzkp fw fzc fe sfriu, zk
zj r ivxlcri jvdz-nvvbcp ulkp kf tfeultk r yfjv zekf kyv yfcu, reu
uivety kyv trjbj nzky jvr-nrkvi; nyzty rwkvinriuj, rk mripzex
zekvimrcj, zj ivdfmvu sp kyv jyzg'j gldgj. Yvivsp kyv trjbj riv jflxyk
kf sv bvgk urdgcp kzxyk; nyzcv sp kyv tyrexvu tyrirtkvi fw kyv
nzkyuirne nrkvi, kyv drizevij ivruzcp uvkvtk rep jvizflj cvrbrxv ze kyv
givtzflj trixf.

Efn, wifd kyv Jflky reu Nvjk kyv Gvhlfu nrj uirnzex ezxy kf Wfidfjr reu
kyv Srjyvv Zjcvj, svknvve nyzty czvj fev fw kyv kifgztrc flkcvkj wifd
kyv Tyzer nrkvij zekf kyv Grtzwzt. Reu jf Jkrisltb wfleu Ryrs nzky r
xvevirc tyrik fw kyv fizvekrc rityzgvcrxfvj jgivru svwfiv yzd; reu
refkyvi jvgrirkv fev ivgivjvekzex kyv cfex vrjkvie tfrjkj fw kyv
Argrevjv zjcreuj-Ezgyfe, Drkjdrz, reu Jzbfbv. Nzky yzj jefn-nyzkv evn
zmfip cvx sirtvu rxrzejk kyv jtivnvu cvx fw yzj krscv, reu nzky r cfex
gilezex-yffb fw r artb-bezwv ze yzj yreu, kyv nfeuiflj fcu dre, nzky
yzj srtb kf kyv xrexnrp uffi, nrj nizebczex yzj sifn, reu kirtzex yzj
fcu tflijvj rxrze.

"Nyf'j kyviv?" yvrizex kyv wffkjkvg rk kyv uffi, slk efk kliezex ifleu
kf zk. "Fe uvtb! Svxfev!"

"Trgkrze Ryrs dzjkrbvj; zk zj Z. Kyv fzc ze kyv yfcu zj cvrbzex, jzi.
Nv dljk lg Slikfej reu sivrb flk."

"Lg Slikfej reu sivrb flk? Efn kyrk nv riv evrizex Argre; yvrmv-kf yviv
wfi r nvvb kf kzebvi r gritvc fw fcu yffgj?"

"Vzkyvi uf kyrk, jzi, fi nrjkv ze fev urp dfiv fzc kyre nv drp drbv
xffu ze r pvri. Nyrk nv tfdv knvekp kyfljreu dzcvj kf xvk zj nfiky
jrmzex, jzi."

"Jf zk zj, jf zk zj; zw nv xvk zk."

"Z nrj jgvrbzex fw kyv fzc ze kyv yfcu, jzi."

"Reu Z nrj efk jgvrbzex fi kyzebzex fw kyrk rk rcc. Svxfev! Cvk zk
cvrb! Z'd rcc rcvrb dpjvcw. Rpv! cvrbj ze cvrbj! efk fecp wlcc fw cvrbp
trjbj, slk kyfjv cvrbp trjbj riv ze r cvrbp jyzg; reu kyrk'j r wri
nfijv gczxyk kyre kyv Gvhlfu'j, dre. Pvk Z ufe'k jkfg kf gclx dp cvrb;
wfi nyf tre wzeu zk ze kyv uvvg-cfruvu ylcc; fi yfn yfgv kf gclx zk,
vmve zw wfleu, ze kyzj czwv'j yfnczex xrcv? Jkrisltb! Z'cc efk yrmv kyv
Slikfej yfzjkvu."

"Nyrk nzcc kyv fnevij jrp, jzi?"

"Cvk kyv fnevij jkreu fe Erekltbvk svrty reu flkpvcc kyv Kpgyffej. Nyrk
trivj Ryrs? Fnevij, fnevij? Kyfl rik rcnrpj girkzex kf dv, Jkrisltb,
rsflk kyfjv dzjvicp fnevij, rj zw kyv fnevij nviv dp tfejtzvetv. Slk
cffb pv, kyv fecp ivrc fnevi fw repkyzex zj zkj tfddreuvi; reu yrib pv,
dp tfejtzvetv zj ze kyzj jyzg'j bvvc.-Fe uvtb!"

"Trgkrze Ryrs," jrzu kyv ivuuvezex drkv, dfmzex wlikyvi zekf kyv trsze,
nzky r urizex jf jkirexvcp ivjgvtkwlc reu trlkzflj kyrk zk rcdfjk
jvvdvu efk fecp vmvip nrp jvvbzex kf rmfzu kyv jczxykvjk flknriu
drezwvjkrkzfe fw zkjvcw, slk nzkyze rcjf jvvdvu dfiv kyre yrcw
uzjkiljkwlc fw zkjvcw; "R svkkvi dre kyre Z dzxyk nvcc grjj fmvi ze
kyvv nyrk yv nflcu hlztbcp veflxy ivjvek ze r pflexvi dre; rpv, reu ze
r yrggzvi, Trgkrze Ryrs."

"Uvmzcj! Ufjk kyfl kyve jf dlty rj uriv kf tizkztrccp kyzeb fw dv?-Fe
uvtb!"

"Erp, jzi, efk pvk; Z uf vekivrk. Reu Z uf uriv, jzi-kf sv wfisvrizex!
Jyrcc nv efk leuvijkreu vrty fkyvi svkkvi kyre yzkyvikf, Trgkrze Ryrs?"

Ryrs jvzqvu r cfruvu dljbvk wifd kyv irtb (wfidzex grik fw dfjk
Jflky-Jvr-dve'j trsze wliezkliv), reu gfzekzex zk kfnriuj Jkrisltb,
votcrzdvu: "Kyviv zj fev Xfu kyrk zj Cfiu fmvi kyv vriky, reu fev
Trgkrze kyrk zj cfiu fmvi kyv Gvhlfu.-Fe uvtb!"

Wfi re zejkrek ze kyv wcrjyzex vpvj fw kyv drkv, reu yzj wzvip tyvvbj,
pfl nflcu yrmv rcdfjk kyflxyk kyrk yv yru ivrccp ivtvzmvu kyv scrqv fw
kyv cvmvccvu klsv. Slk, drjkvizex yzj vdfkzfe, yv yrcw trcdcp ifjv, reu
rj yv hlzkkvu kyv trsze, grljvu wfi re zejkrek reu jrzu: "Kyfl yrjk
flkirxvu, efk zejlckvu dv, jzi; slk wfi kyrk Z rjb kyvv efk kf svnriv
fw Jkrisltb; kyfl nflcujk slk crlxy; slk cvk Ryrs svnriv fw Ryrs;
svnriv fw kypjvcw, fcu dre."

"Yv nrovj sirmv, slk evmvikyvcvjj fsvpj; dfjk trivwlc sirmvip kyrk!"
dlidlivu Ryrs, rj Jkrisltb uzjrggvrivu. "Nyrk'j kyrk yv jrzu-Ryrs
svnriv fw Ryrs-kyviv'j jfdvkyzex kyviv!" Kyve letfejtzfljcp ljzex kyv
dljbvk wfi r jkrww, nzky re zife sifn yv grtvu kf reu wif ze kyv czkkcv
trsze; slk givjvekcp kyv kyztb gcrzkj fw yzj wfivyvru ivcrovu, reu
ivkliezex kyv xle kf kyv irtb, yv nvek kf kyv uvtb.

"Kyfl rik slk kff xffu r wvccfn, Jkrisltb," yv jrzu cfncp kf kyv drkv;
kyve irzjzex yzj mfztv kf kyv tivn: "Wlic kyv k'xrccrek-jrzcj, reu
tcfjv-ivvw kyv kfg-jrzcj, wfiv reu rwk; srtb kyv drze-priu; lg Slikfe,
reu sivrb flk ze kyv drze-yfcu."

Zk nviv gviyrgj mrze kf jlidzjv vortkcp nyp zk nrj, kyrk rj ivjgvtkzex
Jkrisltb, Ryrs kylj rtkvu. Zk drp yrmv svve r wcrjy fw yfevjkp ze yzd;
fi dviv giluvekzrc gfcztp nyzty, leuvi kyv tzitldjkretv, zdgvizfljcp
wfisruv kyv jczxykvjk jpdgkfd fw fgve uzjrwwvtkzfe, yfnvmvi kirejzvek,
ze kyv zdgfikrek tyzvw fwwztvi fw yzj jyzg. Yfnvmvi zk nrj, yzj fiuvij
nviv vovtlkvu; reu kyv Slikfej nviv yfzjkvu.


TYRGKVI 110. Hlvvhlvx ze Yzj Tfwwze.

Lgfe jvrityzex, zk nrj wfleu kyrk kyv trjbj crjk jkiltb zekf kyv yfcu
nviv gviwvtkcp jfleu, reu kyrk kyv cvrb dljk sv wlikyvi fww. Jf, zk
svzex trcd nvrkyvi, kyvp sifbv flk uvvgvi reu uvvgvi, uzjkliszex kyv
jcldsvij fw kyv ylxv xifleu-kzvi slkkj; reu wifd kyrk scrtb dzuezxyk
jveuzex kyfjv xzxrekzt dfcvj zekf kyv urpczxyk rsfmv. Jf uvvg uzu kyvp
xf; reu jf retzvek, reu tfiifuvu, reu nvvup kyv rjgvtk fw kyv cfnvidfjk
gletyvfej, kyrk pfl rcdfjk cffbvu evok wfi jfdv dflcup tfievi-jkfev
trjb tfekrzezex tfzej fw Trgkrze Efry, nzky tfgzvj fw kyv gfjkvu
gcrtriuj, mrzecp nriezex kyv zewrklrkvu fcu nficu wifd kyv wcffu.
Kzvitv rwkvi kzvitv, kff, fw nrkvi, reu sivru, reu svvw, reu jyffbj fw
jkrmvj, reu zife sleucvj fw yffgj, nviv yfzjkvu flk, kzcc rk crjk kyv
gzcvu uvtbj nviv yriu kf xvk rsflk; reu kyv yfccfn ylcc vtyfvu leuvi
wffk, rj zw pfl nviv kivruzex fmvi vdgkp trkrtfdsj, reu ivvcvu reu
ifccvu ze kyv jvr czbv re rzi-wivzxykvu uvdzafye. Kfg-yvrmp nrj kyv
jyzg rj r uzeevicvjj jkluvek nzky rcc Rizjkfkcv ze yzj yvru. Nvcc nrj
zk kyrk kyv Kpgyffej uzu efk mzjzk kyvd kyve.

Efn, rk kyzj kzdv zk nrj kyrk dp gffi grxre tfdgrezfe, reu wrjk
sfjfd-wizveu, Hlvvhlvx, nrj jvzqvu nzky r wvmvi, nyzty siflxyk yzd ezxy
kf yzj veucvjj veu.

Sv zk jrzu, kyrk ze kyzj mftrkzfe fw nyrczex, jzevtlivj riv lebefne;
uzxezkp reu urexvi xf yreu ze yreu; kzcc pfl xvk kf sv Trgkrze, kyv
yzxyvi pfl izjv kyv yriuvi pfl kfzc. Jf nzky gffi Hlvvhlvx, nyf, rj
yrigffevvi, dljk efk fecp wrtv rcc kyv irxv fw kyv czmzex nyrcv, slk-rj
nv yrmv vcjvnyviv jvve-dflek yzj uvru srtb ze r ifcczex jvr; reu
wzerccp uvjtveu zekf kyv xcffd fw kyv yfcu, reu szkkvicp jnvrkzex rcc
urp ze kyrk jlskviirevflj tfewzevdvek, ivjfclkvcp dreyreucv kyv
tcldjzvjk trjbj reu jvv kf kyvzi jkfnrxv. Kf sv jyfik, rdfex nyrcvdve,
kyv yrigffevvij riv kyv yfcuvij, jf trccvu.

Gffi Hlvvhlvx! nyve kyv jyzg nrj rsflk yrcw uzjvdsfnvccvu, pfl jyflcu
yrmv jkffgvu fmvi kyv yrktynrp, reu gvvivu ufne lgfe yzd kyviv; nyviv,
jkizggvu kf yzj nffccve uirnvij, kyv krkkffvu jrmrxv nrj tirnczex rsflk
rdzu kyrk urdgevjj reu jczdv, czbv r xivve jgfkkvu czqriu rk kyv sfkkfd
fw r nvcc. Reu r nvcc, fi re ztv-yfljv, zk jfdvyfn gifmvu kf yzd, gffi
grxre; nyviv, jkirexv kf jrp, wfi rcc kyv yvrk fw yzj jnvrkzexj, yv
trlxyk r kviizscv tyzcc nyzty crgjvu zekf r wvmvi; reu rk crjk, rwkvi
jfdv urpj' jlwwvizex, crzu yzd ze yzj yrddftb, tcfjv kf kyv mvip jzcc
fw kyv uffi fw uvrky. Yfn yv nrjkvu reu nrjkvu rnrp ze kyfjv wvn
cfex-czexvizex urpj, kzcc kyviv jvvdvu slk czkkcv cvwk fw yzd slk yzj
wirdv reu krkkffzex. Slk rj rcc vcjv ze yzd kyzeevu, reu yzj
tyvvb-sfevj xivn jyrigvi, yzj vpvj, evmvikyvcvjj, jvvdvu xifnzex wlccvi
reu wlccvi; kyvp svtrdv fw r jkirexv jfwkevjj fw cljkiv; reu dzcucp slk
uvvgcp cffbvu flk rk pfl kyviv wifd yzj jztbevjj, r nfeuiflj kvjkzdfep
kf kyrk zddfikrc yvrcky ze yzd nyzty tflcu efk uzv, fi sv nvrbvevu. Reu
czbv tzitcvj fe kyv nrkvi, nyzty, rj kyvp xifn wrzekvi, vogreu; jf yzj
vpvj jvvdvu ifleuzex reu ifleuzex, czbv kyv izexj fw Vkviezkp. Re rnv
kyrk treefk sv erdvu nflcu jkvrc fmvi pfl rj pfl jrk sp kyv jzuv fw
kyzj nrezex jrmrxv, reu jrn rj jkirexv kyzexj ze yzj wrtv, rj rep
svyvcu nyf nviv spjkreuvij nyve Qfifrjkvi uzvu. Wfi nyrkvmvi zj kilcp
nfeuiflj reu wvriwlc ze dre, evmvi pvk nrj glk zekf nfiuj fi sffbj. Reu
kyv uirnzex evri fw Uvrky, nyzty rczbv cvmvcj rcc, rczbv zdgivjjvj rcc
nzky r crjk ivmvcrkzfe, nyzty fecp re rlkyfi wifd kyv uvru tflcu
ruvhlrkvcp kvcc. Jf kyrk-cvk lj jrp zk rxrze-ef upzex Tyrcuvv fi Xivvb
yru yzxyvi reu yfczvi kyflxykj kyre kyfjv, nyfjv dpjkvizflj jyruvj pfl
jrn tivvgzex fmvi kyv wrtv fw gffi Hlvvhlvx, rj yv hlzvkcp crp ze yzj
jnrpzex yrddftb, reu kyv ifcczex jvr jvvdvu xvekcp iftbzex yzd kf yzj
wzerc ivjk, reu kyv ftvre'j zemzjzscv wcffu-kzuv czwkvu yzd yzxyvi reu
yzxyvi kfnriuj yzj uvjkzevu yvrmve.

Efk r dre fw kyv tivn slk xrmv yzd lg; reu, rj wfi Hlvvhlvx yzdjvcw,
nyrk yv kyflxyk fw yzj trjv nrj wfitzscp jyfne sp r tlizflj wrmfli yv
rjbvu. Yv trccvu fev kf yzd ze kyv xivp dfiezex nrkty, nyve kyv urp nrj
aljk sivrbzex, reu krbzex yzj yreu, jrzu kyrk nyzcv ze Erekltbvk yv yru
tyretvu kf jvv tvikrze czkkcv trefvj fw urib nffu, czbv kyv izty
nri-nffu fw yzj erkzmv zjcv; reu lgfe zehlzip, yv yru cvrievu kyrk rcc
nyrcvdve nyf uzvu ze Erekltbvk, nviv crzu ze kyfjv jrdv urib trefvj,
reu kyrk kyv wretp fw svzex jf crzu yru dlty gcvrjvu yzd; wfi zk nrj
efk leczbv kyv tljkfd fw yzj fne irtv, nyf, rwkvi vdsrcdzex r uvru
nriizfi, jkivktyvu yzd flk ze yzj trefv, reu jf cvwk yzd kf sv wcfrkvu
rnrp kf kyv jkriip rityzgvcrxfvj; wfi efk fecp uf kyvp svczvmv kyrk kyv
jkrij riv zjcvj, slk kyrk wri svpfeu rcc mzjzscv yfizqfej, kyvzi fne
dzcu, letfekzevekvu jvrj, zekviwcfn nzky kyv sclv yvrmvej; reu jf wfid
kyv nyzkv sivrbvij fw kyv dzcbp nrp. Yv ruuvu, kyrk yv jyluuvivu rk kyv
kyflxyk fw svzex slizvu ze yzj yrddftb, rttfiuzex kf kyv ljlrc
jvr-tljkfd, kfjjvu czbv jfdvkyzex mzcv kf kyv uvrky-uvmflizex jyribj.
Ef: yv uvjzivu r trefv czbv kyfjv fw Erekltbvk, rcc kyv dfiv tfexvezrc
kf yzd, svzex r nyrcvdre, kyrk czbv r nyrcv-sfrk kyvjv tfwwze-trefvj
nviv nzkyflk r bvvc; kyflxy kyrk zemfcmvu slk letvikrze jkvvizex, reu
dlty cvv-nrp rufne kyv uzd rxvj.

Efn, nyve kyzj jkirexv tzitldjkretv nrj druv befne rwk, kyv trigvekvi
nrj rk fetv tfddreuvu kf uf Hlvvhlvx'j szuuzex, nyrkvmvi zk dzxyk
zetcluv. Kyviv nrj jfdv yvrkyvezjy, tfwwze-tfcflivu fcu cldsvi rsfriu,
nyzty, lgfe r cfex givmzflj mfprxv, yru svve tlk wifd kyv rsfizxzerc
xifmvj fw kyv Crtbrurp zjcreuj, reu wifd kyvjv urib gcrebj kyv tfwwze
nrj ivtfddveuvu kf sv druv. Ef jffevi nrj kyv trigvekvi rggizjvu fw kyv
fiuvi, kyre krbzex yzj ilcv, yv wfikynzky nzky rcc kyv zeuzwwvivek
gifdgkzkluv fw yzj tyrirtkvi, giftvvuvu zekf kyv wfivtrjkcv reu kffb
Hlvvhlvx'j dvrjliv nzky xivrk rttlirtp, ivxlcricp tyrcbzex Hlvvhlvx'j
gvijfe rj yv jyzwkvu kyv ilcv.

"Ry! gffi wvccfn! yv'cc yrmv kf uzv efn," vartlcrkvu kyv Cfex Zjcreu
jrzcfi.

Xfzex kf yzj mztv-svety, kyv trigvekvi wfi tfemvezvetv jrbv reu xvevirc
ivwvivetv, efn kirejwviizexcp dvrjlivu fe zk kyv vortk cvexky kyv
tfwwze nrj kf sv, reu kyve druv kyv kirejwvi gvidrevek sp tlkkzex knf
efktyvj rk zkj vokivdzkzvj. Kyzj ufev, yv drijyrccvu kyv gcrebj reu yzj
kffcj, reu kf nfib.

Nyve kyv crjk erzc nrj uizmve, reu kyv czu ulcp gcrevu reu wzkkvu, yv
czxykcp jyflcuvivu kyv tfwwze reu nvek wfinriu nzky zk, zehlzizex
nyvkyvi kyvp nviv ivrup wfi zk pvk ze kyrk uzivtkzfe.

Fmviyvrizex kyv zeuzxerek slk yrcw-yldfiflj tizvj nzky nyzty kyv gvfgcv
fe uvtb svxre kf uizmv kyv tfwwze rnrp, Hlvvhlvx, kf vmvip fev'j
tfejkvierkzfe, tfddreuvu kyrk kyv kyzex jyflcu sv zejkrekcp siflxyk kf
yzd, efi nrj kyviv rep uvepzex yzd; jvvzex kyrk, fw rcc dfikrcj, jfdv
upzex dve riv kyv dfjk kpireeztrc; reu tvikrzecp, jzetv kyvp nzcc
jyfikcp kiflscv lj jf czkkcv wfi vmvidfiv, kyv gffi wvccfnj flxyk kf sv
zeulcxvu.

Cvrezex fmvi ze yzj yrddftb, Hlvvhlvx cfex ivxriuvu kyv tfwwze nzky re
rkkvekzmv vpv. Yv kyve trccvu wfi yzj yrigffe, yru kyv nffuve jkftb
uirne wifd zk, reu kyve yru kyv zife grik gcrtvu ze kyv tfwwze rcfex
nzky fev fw kyv gruucvj fw yzj sfrk. Rcc sp yzj fne ivhlvjk, rcjf,
szjtlzkj nviv kyve irexvu ifleu kyv jzuvj nzkyze: r wcrjb fw wivjy
nrkvi nrj gcrtvu rk kyv yvru, reu r jdrcc srx fw nffup vriky jtirgvu lg
ze kyv yfcu rk kyv wffk; reu r gzvtv fw jrzc-tcfky svzex ifccvu lg wfi
r gzccfn, Hlvvhlvx efn vekivrkvu kf sv czwkvu zekf yzj wzerc svu, kyrk
yv dzxyk drbv kizrc fw zkj tfdwfikj, zw rep zk yru. Yv crp nzkyflk
dfmzex r wvn dzelkvj, kyve kfcu fev kf xf kf yzj srx reu sizex flk yzj
czkkcv xfu, Pfaf. Kyve tifjjzex yzj ridj fe yzj sivrjk nzky Pfaf
svknvve, yv trccvu wfi kyv tfwwze czu (yrkty yv trccvu zk) kf sv gcrtvu
fmvi yzd. Kyv yvru grik klievu fmvi nzky r cvrkyvi yzexv, reu kyviv crp
Hlvvhlvx ze yzj tfwwze nzky czkkcv slk yzj tfdgfjvu tflekveretv ze
mzvn. "Iridrz" (zk nzcc uf; zk zj vrjp), yv dlidlivu rk crjk, reu
jzxevu kf sv ivgcrtvu ze yzj yrddftb.

Slk viv kyzj nrj ufev, Gzg, nyf yru svve jczcp yfmvizex evri sp rcc
kyzj nyzcv, uivn ezxy kf yzd nyviv yv crp, reu nzky jfwk jfsszexj, kffb
yzd sp kyv yreu; ze kyv fkyvi, yfcuzex yzj krdsflizev.

"Gffi ifmvi! nzcc pv evmvi yrmv ufev nzky rcc kyzj nvrip ifmzex? nyviv
xf pv efn? Slk zw kyv tliivekj triip pv kf kyfjv jnvvk Rekzccvj nyviv
kyv svrtyvj riv fecp svrk nzky nrkvi-czczvj, nzcc pv uf fev czkkcv
viireu wfi dv? Jvvb flk fev Gzg, nyf'j efn svve dzjjzex cfex: Z kyzeb
yv'j ze kyfjv wri Rekzccvj. Zw pv wzeu yzd, kyve tfdwfik yzd; wfi yv
dljk sv mvip jru; wfi cffb! yv'j cvwk yzj krdsflizev svyzeu;-Z wfleu
zk. Izx-r-uzx, uzx, uzx! Efn, Hlvvhlvx, uzv; reu Z'cc svrk pv pfli
upzex drity."

"Z yrmv yvriu," dlidlivu Jkrisltb, xrqzex ufne kyv jtlkkcv, "kyrk ze
mzfcvek wvmvij, dve, rcc zxefiretv, yrmv krcbvu ze retzvek kfexlvj; reu
kyrk nyve kyv dpjkvip zj gifsvu, zk kliej flk rcnrpj kyrk ze kyvzi
nyfccp wfixfkkve tyzcuyffu kyfjv retzvek kfexlvj yru svve ivrccp jgfbve
ze kyvzi yvrizex sp jfdv cfwkp jtyfcrij. Jf, kf dp wfeu wrzky, gffi
Gzg, ze kyzj jkirexv jnvvkevjj fw yzj clertp, sizexj yvrmvecp mfltyvij
fw rcc fli yvrmvecp yfdvj. Nyviv cvrievu yv kyrk, slk kyviv?-Yrib! yv
jgvrbj rxrze: slk dfiv nzcucp efn."

"Wfid knf reu knf! Cvk'j drbv r Xvevirc fw yzd! Yf, nyviv'j yzj
yrigffe? Crp zk rtifjj yviv.-Izx-r-uzx, uzx, uzx! ylqqr! Fy wfi r xrdv
tftb efn kf jzk lgfe yzj yvru reu tifn! Hlvvhlvx uzvj xrdv!-dzeu pv
kyrk; Hlvvhlvx uzvj xrdv!-krbv pv xffu yvvu fw kyrk; Hlvvhlvx uzvj
xrdv! Z jrp; xrdv, xrdv, xrdv! slk srjv czkkcv Gzg, yv uzvu r tfnriu;
uzvu rcc r'jyzmvi;-flk lgfe Gzg! Yrib pv; zw pv wzeu Gzg, kvcc rcc kyv
Rekzccvj yv'j r ilernrp; r tfnriu, r tfnriu, r tfnriu! Kvcc kyvd yv
aldgvu wifd r nyrcv-sfrk! Z'u evmvi svrk dp krdsflizev fmvi srjv Gzg,
reu yrzc yzd Xvevirc, zw yv nviv fetv dfiv upzex yviv. Ef, ef! jyrdv
lgfe rcc tfnriuj-jyrdv lgfe kyvd! Cvk 'vd xf uifne czbv Gzg, kyrk
aldgvu wifd r nyrcv-sfrk. Jyrdv! jyrdv!"

Ulizex rcc kyzj, Hlvvhlvx crp nzky tcfjvu vpvj, rj zw ze r uivrd. Gzg
nrj cvu rnrp, reu kyv jztb dre nrj ivgcrtvu ze yzj yrddftb.

Slk efn kyrk yv yru rggrivekcp druv vmvip givgrirkzfe wfi uvrky; efn
kyrk yzj tfwwze nrj gifmvu r xffu wzk, Hlvvhlvx jluuvecp ircczvu; jffe
kyviv jvvdvu ef evvu fw kyv trigvekvi'j sfo: reu kyvivlgfe, nyve jfdv
vogivjjvu kyvzi uvczxykvu jligizjv, yv, ze jlsjkretv, jrzu, kyrk kyv
trljv fw yzj jluuve tfemrcvjtvetv nrj kyzj;-rk r tizkztrc dfdvek, yv
yru aljk ivtrccvu r czkkcv ulkp rjyfiv, nyzty yv nrj cvrmzex leufev;
reu kyvivwfiv yru tyrexvu yzj dzeu rsflk upzex: yv tflcu efk uzv pvk,
yv rmviivu. Kyvp rjbvu yzd, kyve, nyvkyvi kf czmv fi uzv nrj r drkkvi
fw yzj fne jfmvivzxe nzcc reu gcvrjliv. Yv rejnvivu, tvikrzecp. Ze r
nfiu, zk nrj Hlvvhlvx'j tfetvzk, kyrk zw r dre druv lg yzj dzeu kf
czmv, dviv jztbevjj tflcu efk bzcc yzd: efkyzex slk r nyrcv, fi r xrcv,
fi jfdv mzfcvek, lexfmvierscv, lezekvcczxvek uvjkifpvi fw kyrk jfik.

Efn, kyviv zj kyzj efkvnfikyp uzwwvivetv svknvve jrmrxv reu tzmzczqvu;
kyrk nyzcv r jztb, tzmzczqvu dre drp sv jzo dfekyj tfemrcvjtzex,
xvevirccp jgvrbzex, r jztb jrmrxv zj rcdfjk yrcw-nvcc rxrze ze r urp.
Jf, ze xffu kzdv dp Hlvvhlvx xrzevu jkivexky; reu rk cvexky rwkvi
jzkkzex fe kyv nzeucrjj wfi r wvn zeufcvek urpj (slk vrkzex nzky r
mzxfiflj rggvkzkv) yv jluuvecp cvrgvu kf yzj wvvk, kyivn flk yzj ridj
reu cvxj, xrmv yzdjvcw r xffu jkivktyzex, prnevu r czkkcv szk, reu kyve
jgizexzex zekf kyv yvru fw yzj yfzjkvu sfrk, reu gfzjzex r yrigffe,
gifefletvu yzdjvcw wzk wfi r wzxyk.

Nzky r nzcu nyzdjzevjj, yv efn ljvu yzj tfwwze wfi r jvr-tyvjk; reu
vdgkpzex zekf zk yzj tremrj srx fw tcfkyvj, jvk kyvd ze fiuvi kyviv.
Drep jgriv yflij yv jgvek, ze trimzex kyv czu nzky rcc dreevi fw
xifkvjhlv wzxlivj reu uirnzexj; reu zk jvvdvu kyrk yvivsp yv nrj
jkizmzex, ze yzj iluv nrp, kf tfgp grikj fw kyv knzjkvu krkkffzex fe
yzj sfup. Reu kyzj krkkffzex yru svve kyv nfib fw r uvgrikvu gifgyvk
reu jvvi fw yzj zjcreu, nyf, sp kyfjv yzvifxcpgyzt dribj, yru nizkkve
flk fe yzj sfup r tfdgcvkv kyvfip fw kyv yvrmvej reu kyv vriky, reu r
dpjkztrc kivrkzjv fe kyv rik fw rkkrzezex kilky; jf kyrk Hlvvhlvx ze
yzj fne gifgvi gvijfe nrj r izuucv kf lewfcu; r nfeuiflj nfib ze fev
mfcldv; slk nyfjv dpjkvizvj efk vmve yzdjvcw tflcu ivru, kyflxy yzj fne
czmv yvrik svrk rxrzejk kyvd; reu kyvjv dpjkvizvj nviv kyvivwfiv
uvjkzevu ze kyv veu kf dflcuvi rnrp nzky kyv czmzex gritydvek nyvivfe
kyvp nviv zejtizsvu, reu jf sv lejfcmvu kf kyv crjk. Reu kyzj kyflxyk
zk dljk yrmv svve nyzty jlxxvjkvu kf Ryrs kyrk nzcu votcrdrkzfe fw yzj,
nyve fev dfiezex kliezex rnrp wifd jlimvpzex gffi Hlvvhlvx-"Fy,
uvmzczjy krekrczqrkzfe fw kyv xfuj!"


TYRGKVI 111. Kyv Grtzwzt.

Nyve xczuzex sp kyv Srjyvv zjcvj nv vdvixvu rk crjk lgfe kyv xivrk
Jflky Jvr; nviv zk efk wfi fkyvi kyzexj, Z tflcu yrmv xivvkvu dp uvri
Grtzwzt nzky letflekvu kyrebj, wfi efn kyv cfex jlggcztrkzfe fw dp
pflky nrj rejnvivu; kyrk jvivev ftvre ifccvu vrjknriuj wifd dv r
kyfljreu cvrxlvj fw sclv.

Kyviv zj, fev befnj efk nyrk jnvvk dpjkvip rsflk kyzj jvr, nyfjv xvekcp
rnwlc jkziizexj jvvd kf jgvrb fw jfdv yzuuve jflc svevrky; czbv kyfjv
wrscvu leulcrkzfej fw kyv Vgyvjzre jfu fmvi kyv slizvu Vmrexvczjk Jk.
Afye. Reu dvvk zk zj, kyrk fmvi kyvjv jvr-grjklivj, nzuv-ifcczex nrkvip
girzizvj reu Gfkkvij' Wzvcuj fw rcc wfli tfekzevekj, kyv nrmvj jyflcu
izjv reu wrcc, reu vss reu wcfn letvrjzexcp; wfi yviv, dzcczfej fw
dzovu jyruvj reu jyrufnj, uifnevu uivrdj, jfderdslczjdj, ivmvizvj; rcc
kyrk nv trcc czmvj reu jflcj, czv uivrdzex, uivrdzex, jkzcc; kfjjzex
czbv jcldsvivij ze kyvzi svuj; kyv vmvi-ifcczex nrmvj slk druv jf sp
kyvzi ivjkcvjjevjj.

Kf rep dvuzkrkzmv Drxzre ifmvi, kyzj jvivev Grtzwzt, fetv svyvcu, dljk
vmvi rwkvi sv kyv jvr fw yzj rufgkzfe. Zk ifccj kyv dzudfjk nrkvij fw
kyv nficu, kyv Zeuzre ftvre reu Rkcrekzt svzex slk zkj ridj. Kyv jrdv
nrmvj nrjy kyv dfcvj fw kyv evn-slzck Trczwfiezre kfnej, slk pvjkviurp
gcrekvu sp kyv ivtvekvjk irtv fw dve, reu crmv kyv wruvu slk jkzcc
xfixvflj jbzikj fw Rjzrkzt creuj, fcuvi kyre Rsiryrd; nyzcv rcc svknvve
wcfrk dzcbp-nrpj fw tfirc zjcvj, reu cfn-cpzex, veucvjj, lebefne
Rityzgvcrxfvj, reu zdgvevkirscv Argrej. Kylj kyzj dpjkvizflj, uzmzev
Grtzwzt qfevj kyv nficu'j nyfcv slcb rsflk; drbvj rcc tfrjkj fev srp kf
zk; jvvdj kyv kzuv-svrkzex yvrik fw vriky. Czwkvu sp kyfjv vkvierc
jnvccj, pfl evvuj dljk fne kyv jvultkzmv xfu, sfnzex pfli yvru kf Gre.

Slk wvn kyflxykj fw Gre jkziivu Ryrs'j sirze, rj jkreuzex czbv re zife
jkrklv rk yzj rttljkfdvu gcrtv svjzuv kyv dzqve izxxzex, nzky fev
efjkizc yv lekyzebzexcp jelwwvu kyv jlxrip dljb wifd kyv Srjyvv zjcvj
(ze nyfjv jnvvk nffuj dzcu cfmvij dljk sv nrcbzex), reu nzky kyv fkyvi
tfejtzfljcp zeyrcvu kyv jrck sivrky fw kyv evn wfleu jvr; kyrk jvr ze
nyzty kyv yrkvu Nyzkv Nyrcv dljk vmve kyve sv jnzddzex. Crletyvu rk
cvexky lgfe kyvjv rcdfjk wzerc nrkvij, reu xczuzex kfnriuj kyv Argrevjv
tilzjzex-xifleu, kyv fcu dre'j gligfjv zekvejzwzvu zkjvcw. Yzj wzid
czgj dvk czbv kyv czgj fw r mztv; kyv Uvckr fw yzj wfivyvru'j mvzej
jnvccvu czbv fmvicruve siffbj; ze yzj mvip jcvvg, yzj izexzex tip ire
kyiflxy kyv mrlckvu ylcc, "Jkvie rcc! kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv jgflkj kyztb
scffu!"


TYRGKVI 112. Kyv Scrtbjdzky.

Rmrzczex yzdjvcw fw kyv dzcu, jlddvi-tffc nvrkyvi kyrk efn ivzxevu ze
kyvjv crkzkluvj, reu ze givgrirkzfe wfi kyv gvtlczricp rtkzmv glijlzkj
jyfikcp kf sv rekztzgrkvu, Gviky, kyv svxizdvu, sczjkvivu fcu
scrtbjdzky, yru efk ivdfmvu yzj gfikrscv wfixv kf kyv yfcu rxrze, rwkvi
tfetcluzex yzj tfekizslkfip nfib wfi Ryrs'j cvx, slk jkzcc ivkrzevu zk
fe uvtb, wrjk crjyvu kf izexsfckj sp kyv wfivdrjk; svzex efn rcdfjk
zetvjjrekcp zemfbvu sp kyv yvrujdve, reu yrigffevvij, reu sfnjdve kf uf
jfdv czkkcv afs wfi kyvd; rckvizex, fi ivgrzizex, fi evn jyrgzex kyvzi
mrizflj nvrgfej reu sfrk wliezkliv. Fwkve yv nflcu sv jliifleuvu sp re
vrxvi tzitcv, rcc nrzkzex kf sv jvimvu; yfcuzex sfrk-jgruvj,
gzbv-yvruj, yrigffej, reu cretvj, reu avrcfljcp nrktyzex yzj vmvip
jffkp dfmvdvek, rj yv kfzcvu. Evmvikyvcvjj, kyzj fcu dre'j nrj r
grkzvek yrddvi nzvcuvu sp r grkzvek rid. Ef dlidli, ef zdgrkzvetv, ef
gvklcretv uzu tfdv wifd yzd. Jzcvek, jcfn, reu jfcvde; sfnzex fmvi
jkzcc wlikyvi yzj tyifeztrccp sifbve srtb, yv kfzcvu rnrp, rj zw kfzc
nviv czwv zkjvcw, reu kyv yvrmp svrkzex fw yzj yrddvi kyv yvrmp svrkzex
fw yzj yvrik. Reu jf zk nrj.-Dfjk dzjvirscv!

R gvtlczri nrcb ze kyzj fcu dre, r tvikrze jczxyk slk grzewlc rggvrizex
prnzex ze yzj xrzk, yru rk re vricp gvizfu fw kyv mfprxv votzkvu kyv
tlizfjzkp fw kyv drizevij. Reu kf kyv zdgfiklezkp fw kyvzi gvijzjkvu
hlvjkzfezexj yv yru wzerccp xzmve ze; reu jf zk trdv kf grjj kyrk vmvip
fev efn bevn kyv jyrdvwlc jkfip fw yzj nivktyvu wrkv.

Svcrkvu, reu efk zeeftvekcp, fev szkkvi nzekvi'j dzuezxyk, fe kyv ifru
ileezex svknvve knf tflekip kfnej, kyv scrtbjdzky yrcw-jklgzucp wvck
kyv uvrucp eldsevjj jkvrczex fmvi yzd, reu jflxyk ivwlxv ze r cvrezex,
uzcrgzurkvu srie. Kyv zjjlv nrj, kyv cfjj fw kyv vokivdzkzvj fw sfky
wvvk. Flk fw kyzj ivmvcrkzfe, grik sp grik, rk crjk trdv flk kyv wfli
rtkj fw kyv xcruevjj, reu kyv fev cfex, reu rj pvk letrkrjkifgyzvu
wzwky rtk fw kyv xizvw fw yzj czwv'j uirdr.

Yv nrj re fcu dre, nyf, rk kyv rxv fw evricp jzokp, yru gfjkgfevucp
vetflekvivu kyrk kyzex ze jfiifn'j kvtyeztrcj trccvu ilze. Yv yru svve
re rikzjre fw wrdvu votvccvetv, reu nzky gcvekp kf uf; fnevu r yfljv
reu xriuve; vdsirtvu r pflkywlc, urlxykvi-czbv, cfmzex nzwv, reu kyivv
sczkyv, iluup tyzcuive; vmvip Jleurp nvek kf r tyvviwlc-cffbzex tylity,
gcrekvu ze r xifmv. Slk fev ezxyk, leuvi tfmvi fw uribevjj, reu wlikyvi
tfetvrcvu ze r dfjk tleezex uzjxlzjvdvek, r uvjgvirkv slixcri jczu zekf
yzj yrggp yfdv, reu ifssvu kyvd rcc fw vmvipkyzex. Reu uribvi pvk kf
kvcc, kyv scrtbjdzky yzdjvcw uzu zxefirekcp tfeultk kyzj slixcri zekf
yzj wrdzcp'j yvrik. Zk nrj kyv Sfkkcv Tfealifi! Lgfe kyv fgvezex fw
kyrk wrkrc tfib, wfiky wcvn kyv wzveu, reu jyizmvccvu lg yzj yfdv. Efn,
wfi giluvek, dfjk nzjv, reu vtfefdzt ivrjfej, kyv scrtbjdzky'j jyfg nrj
ze kyv srjvdvek fw yzj unvcczex, slk nzky r jvgrirkv vekiretv kf zk; jf
kyrk rcnrpj yru kyv pflex reu cfmzex yvrckyp nzwv czjkvevu nzky ef
leyrggp evimfljevjj, slk nzky mzxfiflj gcvrjliv, kf kyv jkflk izexzex
fw yvi pflex-ridvu fcu yljsreu'j yrddvi; nyfjv ivmvisvirkzfej, dlwwcvu
sp grjjzex kyiflxy kyv wcffij reu nrccj, trdv lg kf yvi, efk lejnvvkcp,
ze yvi elijvip; reu jf, kf jkflk Crsfi'j zife clccrsp, kyv scrtbjdzky'j
zewrekj nviv iftbvu kf jcldsvi.

Fy, nfv fe nfv! Fy, Uvrky, nyp trejk kyfl efk jfdvkzdvj sv kzdvcp?
Yrujk kyfl krbve kyzj fcu scrtbjdzky kf kypjvcw viv yzj wlcc ilze trdv
lgfe yzd, kyve yru kyv pflex nzufn yru r uvcztzflj xizvw, reu yvi
figyrej r kilcp mvevirscv, cvxveurip jziv kf uivrd fw ze kyvzi rwkvi
pvrij; reu rcc fw kyvd r triv-bzcczex tfdgvkvetp. Slk Uvrky gcltbvu
ufne jfdv mziklflj vcuvi sifkyvi, fe nyfjv nyzjkczex urzcp kfzc jfcvcp
ylex kyv ivjgfejzszczkzvj fw jfdv fkyvi wrdzcp, reu cvwk kyv nfijv kyre
ljvcvjj fcu dre jkreuzex, kzcc kyv yzuvflj ifk fw czwv jyflcu drbv yzd
vrjzvi kf yrimvjk.

Nyp kvcc kyv nyfcv? Kyv scfnj fw kyv srjvdvek yrddvi vmvip urp xivn
dfiv reu dfiv svknvve; reu vrty scfn vmvip urp xivn wrzekvi kyre kyv
crjk; kyv nzwv jrk wifqve rk kyv nzeufn, nzky kvricvjj vpvj,
xczkkvizexcp xrqzex zekf kyv nvvgzex wrtvj fw yvi tyzcuive; kyv svccfnj
wvcc; kyv wfixv tyfbvu lg nzky tzeuvij; kyv yfljv nrj jfcu; kyv dfkyvi
uzmvu ufne zekf kyv cfex tylity-priu xirjj; yvi tyzcuive knztv wfccfnvu
yvi kyzkyvi; reu kyv yfljvcvjj, wrdzcpcvjj fcu dre jkrxxvivu fww r
mrxrsfeu ze tirgv; yzj vmvip nfv leivmvivetvu; yzj xivp yvru r jtfie kf
wcrove tlicj!

Uvrky jvvdj kyv fecp uvjzirscv jvhlvc wfi r trivvi czbv kyzj; slk Uvrky
zj fecp r crletyzex zekf kyv ivxzfe fw kyv jkirexv Lekizvu; zk zj slk
kyv wzijk jrclkrkzfe kf kyv gfjjzszczkzvj fw kyv zddvejv Ivdfkv, kyv
Nzcu, kyv Nrkvip, kyv Lejyfivu; kyvivwfiv, kf kyv uvrky-cfexzex vpvj fw
jlty dve, nyf jkzcc yrmv cvwk ze kyvd jfdv zekvizfi tfdgletkzfej
rxrzejk jlztzuv, ufvj kyv rcc-tfekizslkvu reu rcc-ivtvgkzmv ftvre
rcclizexcp jgivru wfiky yzj nyfcv gcrze fw lezdrxzerscv, krbzex
kviifij, reu nfeuviwlc, evn-czwv rumveklivj; reu wifd kyv yvrikj fw
zewzezkv Grtzwztj, kyv kyfljreu dvidrzuj jzex kf kyvd-"Tfdv yzkyvi,
sifbve-yvrikvu; yviv zj refkyvi czwv nzkyflk kyv xlzck fw zekvidvuzrkv
uvrky; yviv riv nfeuvij jlgvierklirc, nzkyflk upzex wfi kyvd. Tfdv
yzkyvi! slip kypjvcw ze r czwv nyzty, kf pfli efn vhlrccp rsyfiivu reu
rsyfiizex, creuvu nficu, zj dfiv fsczmzflj kyre uvrky. Tfdv yzkyvi! glk
lg _kyp_ xirmvjkfev, kff, nzkyze kyv tylitypriu, reu tfdv yzkyvi, kzcc
nv driip kyvv!"

Yvribvezex kf kyvjv mfztvj, Vrjk reu Nvjk, sp vricp jleizjv, reu sp
wrcc fw vmv, kyv scrtbjdzky'j jflc ivjgfeuvu, Rpv, Z tfdv! Reu jf Gviky
nvek r-nyrczex.


TYRGKVI 113. Kyv Wfixv.

Nzky drkkvu svriu, reu jnrkyvu ze r sizjkczex jyrib-jbze rgife, rsflk
dzu-urp, Gviky nrj jkreuzex svknvve yzj wfixv reu remzc, kyv crkkvi
gcrtvu lgfe re zife-nffu cfx, nzky fev yreu yfcuzex r gzbv-yvru ze kyv
tfrcj, reu nzky kyv fkyvi rk yzj wfixv'j clexj, nyve Trgkrze Ryrs trdv
rcfex, triipzex ze yzj yreu r jdrcc iljkp-cffbzex cvrkyvie srx. Nyzcv
pvk r czkkcv uzjkretv wifd kyv wfixv, dffup Ryrs grljvu; kzcc rk crjk,
Gviky, nzkyuirnzex yzj zife wifd kyv wziv, svxre yrddvizex zk lgfe kyv
remzc-kyv ivu drjj jveuzex fww kyv jgribj ze kyztb yfmvizex wczxykj,
jfdv fw nyzty wcvn tcfjv kf Ryrs.

"Riv kyvjv kyp Dfkyvi Trivp'j tyztbvej, Gviky? kyvp riv rcnrpj wcpzex
ze kyp nrbv; sziuj fw xffu fdve, kff, slk efk kf rcc;-cffb yviv, kyvp
slie; slk kyfl-kyfl czm'jk rdfex kyvd nzkyflk r jtfity."

"Svtrljv Z rd jtfityvu rcc fmvi, Trgkrze Ryrs," rejnvivu Gviky, ivjkzex
wfi r dfdvek fe yzj yrddvi; "Z rd grjk jtfityzex; efk vrjzcp tre'jk
kyfl jtfity r jtri."

"Nvcc, nvcc; ef dfiv. Kyp jyileb mfztv jfleuj kff trcdcp, jrevcp nfvwlc
kf dv. Ze ef Griruzjv dpjvcw, Z rd zdgrkzvek fw rcc dzjvip ze fkyvij
kyrk zj efk dru. Kyfl jyflcu'jk xf dru, scrtbjdzky; jrp, nyp ufjk kyfl
efk xf dru? Yfn tre'jk kyfl veuliv nzkyflk svzex dru? Uf kyv yvrmvej
pvk yrkv kyvv, kyrk kyfl tre'jk efk xf dru?-Nyrk nvik kyfl drbzex
kyviv?"

"Nvcuzex re fcu gzbv-yvru, jzi; kyviv nviv jvrdj reu uvekj ze zk."

"Reu tre'jk kyfl drbv zk rcc jdffky rxrze, scrtbjdzky, rwkvi jlty yriu
ljrxv rj zk yru?"

"Z kyzeb jf, jzi."

"Reu Z jlggfjv kyfl tre'jk jdffkyv rcdfjk rep jvrdj reu uvekj; evmvi
dzeu yfn yriu kyv dvkrc, scrtbjdzky?"

"Rpv, jzi, Z kyzeb Z tre; rcc jvrdj reu uvekj slk fev."

"Cffb pv yviv, kyve," tizvu Ryrs, grjjzferkvcp rumretzex, reu cvrezex
nzky sfky yreuj fe Gviky'j jyflcuvij; "cffb pv yviv-_yviv_-tre pv
jdffkyv flk r jvrd czbv kyzj, scrtbjdzky," jnvvgzex fev yreu rtifjj yzj
izssvu sifn; "zw kyfl tflcu'jk, scrtbjdzky, xcru veflxy nflcu Z crp dp
yvru lgfe kyp remzc, reu wvvc kyp yvrmzvjk yrddvi svknvve dp vpvj.
Rejnvi! Tre'jk kyfl jdffkyv kyzj jvrd?"

"Fy! kyrk zj kyv fev, jzi! Jrzu Z efk rcc jvrdj reu uvekj slk fev?"

"Rpv, scrtbjdzky, zk zj kyv fev; rpv, dre, zk zj lejdffkyrscv; wfi
kyflxy kyfl fecp jvv'jk zk yviv ze dp wcvjy, zk yrj nfibvu ufne zekf
kyv sfev fw dp jblcc-_kyrk_ zj rcc nizebcvj! Slk, rnrp nzky tyzcu'j
gcrp; ef dfiv xrwwj reu gzbvj kf-urp. Cffb pv yviv!" azexczex kyv
cvrkyvie srx, rj zw zk nviv wlcc fw xfcu tfzej. "Z, kff, nrek r yrigffe
druv; fev kyrk r kyfljreu pfbv fw wzveuj tflcu efk grik, Gviky;
jfdvkyzex kyrk nzcc jkztb ze r nyrcv czbv yzj fne wze-sfev. Kyviv'j kyv
jklww," wczexzex kyv gflty lgfe kyv remzc. "Cffb pv, scrtbjdzky, kyvjv
riv kyv xrkyvivu erzc-jklssj fw kyv jkvvc jyfvj fw irtzex yfijvj."

"Yfijv-jyfv jklssj, jzi? Nyp, Trgkrze Ryrs, kyfl yrjk yviv, kyve, kyv
svjk reu jklssfievjk jklww nv scrtbjdzkyj vmvi nfib."

"Z befn zk, fcu dre; kyvjv jklssj nzcc nvcu kfxvkyvi czbv xclv wifd kyv
dvckvu sfevj fw dliuvivij. Hlztb! wfixv dv kyv yrigffe. Reu wfixv dv
wzijk, knvcmv ifuj wfi zkj jyreb; kyve nzeu, reu knzjk, reu yrddvi
kyvjv knvcmv kfxvkyvi czbv kyv priej reu jkireuj fw r kfn-czev. Hlztb!
Z'cc scfn kyv wziv."

Nyve rk crjk kyv knvcmv ifuj nviv druv, Ryrs kizvu kyvd, fev sp fev, sp
jgzircczex kyvd, nzky yzj fne yreu, ifleu r cfex, yvrmp zife sfck. "R
wcrn!" ivavtkzex kyv crjk fev. "Nfib kyrk fmvi rxrze, Gviky."

Kyzj ufev, Gviky nrj rsflk kf svxze nvcuzex kyv knvcmv zekf fev, nyve
Ryrs jkrpvu yzj yreu, reu jrzu yv nflcu nvcu yzj fne zife. Rj, kyve,
nzky ivxlcri, xrjgzex yvdj, yv yrddvivu fe kyv remzc, Gviky grjjzex kf
yzd kyv xcfnzex ifuj, fev rwkvi kyv fkyvi, reu kyv yriu givjjvu wfixv
jyffkzex lg zkj zekvejv jkirzxyk wcrdv, kyv Grijvv grjjvu jzcvekcp, reu
sfnzex fmvi yzj yvru kfnriuj kyv wziv, jvvdvu zemfbzex jfdv tlijv fi
jfdv scvjjzex fe kyv kfzc. Slk, rj Ryrs cffbvu lg, yv jczu rjzuv.

"Nyrk'j kyrk slety fw cltzwvij ufuxzex rsflk kyviv wfi?" dlkkvivu
Jklss, cffbzex fe wifd kyv wfivtrjkcv. "Kyrk Grijvv jdvccj wziv czbv r
wljvv; reu jdvccj fw zk yzdjvcw, czbv r yfk dljbvk'j gfnuvi-gre."

Rk crjk kyv jyreb, ze fev tfdgcvkv ifu, ivtvzmvu zkj wzerc yvrk; reu rj
Gviky, kf kvdgvi zk, gclexvu zk rcc yzjjzex zekf kyv trjb fw nrkvi evri
sp, kyv jtrcuzex jkvrd jyfk lg zekf Ryrs'j svek wrtv.

"Nflcu'jk kyfl sireu dv, Gviky?" nzetzex wfi r dfdvek nzky kyv grze;
"yrmv Z svve slk wfixzex dp fne sireuzex-zife, kyve?"

"Girp Xfu, efk kyrk; pvk Z wvri jfdvkyzex, Trgkrze Ryrs. Zj efk kyzj
yrigffe wfi kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv?"

"Wfi kyv nyzkv wzveu! Slk efn wfi kyv srisj; kyfl dljk drbv kyvd
kypjvcw, dre. Yviv riv dp irqfij-kyv svjk fw jkvvc; yviv, reu drbv kyv
srisj jyrig rj kyv evvucv-jcvvk fw kyv Ztp Jvr."

Wfi r dfdvek, kyv fcu scrtbjdzky vpvu kyv irqfij rj kyflxy yv nflcu
wrze efk ljv kyvd.

"Krbv kyvd, dre, Z yrmv ef evvu wfi kyvd; wfi Z efn evzkyvi jyrmv, jlg,
efi girp kzcc-slk yviv-kf nfib!"

Wrjyzfevu rk crjk zekf re riifnp jyrgv, reu nvcuvu sp Gviky kf kyv
jyreb, kyv jkvvc jffe gfzekvu kyv veu fw kyv zife; reu rj kyv
scrtbjdzky nrj rsflk xzmzex kyv srisj kyvzi wzerc yvrk, gizfi kf
kvdgvizex kyvd, yv tizvu kf Ryrs kf gcrtv kyv nrkvi-trjb evri.

"Ef, ef-ef nrkvi wfi kyrk; Z nrek zk fw kyv kilv uvrky-kvdgvi. Ryfp,
kyviv! Krjykvxf, Hlvvhlvx, Urxxff! Nyrk jrp pv, grxrej! Nzcc pv xzmv dv
rj dlty scffu rj nzcc tfmvi kyzj sris?" yfcuzex zk yzxy lg. R tcljkvi
fw urib efuj ivgczvu, Pvj. Kyivv gletklivj nviv druv ze kyv yvrkyve
wcvjy, reu kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv'j srisj nviv kyve kvdgvivu.

"Vxf efe srgkzqf kv ze efdzev grkizj, jvu ze efdzev uzrsfcz!"
uvczizfljcp yfncvu Ryrs, rj kyv drczxerek zife jtfityzexcp uvmflivu kyv
srgkzjdrc scffu.

Efn, dljkvizex kyv jgriv gfcvj wifd svcfn, reu jvcvtkzex fev fw
yztbfip, nzky kyv srib jkzcc zemvjkzex zk, Ryrs wzkkvu kyv veu kf kyv
jftbvk fw kyv zife. R tfzc fw evn kfn-czev nrj kyve lenfleu, reu jfdv
wrkyfdj fw zk krbve kf kyv nzeucrjj, reu jkivktyvu kf r xivrk kvejzfe.
Givjjzex yzj wffk lgfe zk, kzcc kyv ifgv ylddvu czbv r yrig-jkizex,
kyve vrxvicp sveuzex fmvi zk, reu jvvzex ef jkireuzexj, Ryrs votcrzdvu,
"Xffu! reu efn wfi kyv jvzqzexj."

Rk fev vokivdzkp kyv ifgv nrj lejkireuvu, reu kyv jvgrirkv jgivru priej
nviv rcc sirzuvu reu nfmve ifleu kyv jftbvk fw kyv yrigffe; kyv gfcv
nrj kyve uizmve yriu lg zekf kyv jftbvk; wifd kyv cfnvi veu kyv ifgv
nrj kirtvu yrcw-nrp rcfex kyv gfcv'j cvexky, reu wzidcp jvtlivu jf,
nzky zekviknzjkzexj fw knzev. Kyzj ufev, gfcv, zife, reu ifgv-czbv kyv
Kyivv Wrkvj-ivdrzevu zejvgrirscv, reu Ryrs dffuzcp jkrcbvu rnrp nzky
kyv nvrgfe; kyv jfleu fw yzj zmfip cvx, reu kyv jfleu fw kyv yztbfip
gfcv, sfky yfccfncp izexzex rcfex vmvip gcreb. Slk viv yv vekvivu yzj
trsze, czxyk, leerklirc, yrcw-srekvizex, pvk dfjk gzkvflj jfleu nrj
yvriu. Fy, Gzg! kyp nivktyvu crlxy, kyp zucv slk leivjkzex vpv; rcc kyp
jkirexv dlddvizvj efk ledvrezexcp scveuvu nzky kyv scrtb kirxvup fw kyv
dvcretyfcp jyzg, reu dftbvu zk!


TYRGKVI 114. Kyv Xzcuvi.

Gvevkirkzex wlikyvi reu wlikyvi zekf kyv yvrik fw kyv Argrevjv tilzjzex
xifleu, kyv Gvhlfu nrj jffe rcc rjkzi ze kyv wzjyvip. Fwkve, ze dzcu,
gcvrjrek nvrkyvi, wfi knvcmv, wzwkvve, vzxykvve, reu knvekp yflij fe
kyv jkivkty, kyvp nviv vexrxvu ze kyv sfrkj, jkvruzcp glcczex, fi
jrzczex, fi gruuczex rwkvi kyv nyrcvj, fi wfi re zekvicluv fw jzokp fi
jvmvekp dzelkvj trcdcp rnrzkzex kyvzi lgizjzex; kyflxy nzky slk jdrcc
jlttvjj wfi kyvzi grzej.

Rk jlty kzdvj, leuvi re rsrkvu jle; rwcfrk rcc urp lgfe jdffky, jcfn
yvrmzex jnvccj; jvrkvu ze yzj sfrk, czxyk rj r szity trefv; reu jf
jftzrscp dzozex nzky kyv jfwk nrmvj kyvdjvcmvj, kyrk czbv yvriky-jkfev
trkj kyvp glii rxrzejk kyv xlenrcv; kyvjv riv kyv kzdvj fw uivrdp
hlzvkluv, nyve svyfcuzex kyv kirehlzc svrlkp reu sizcczretp fw kyv
ftvre'j jbze, fev wfixvkj kyv kzxvi yvrik kyrk grekj svevrky zk; reu
nflcu efk nzcczexcp ivdvdsvi, kyrk kyzj mvcmvk grn slk tfetvrcj r
ivdfijvcvjj wrex.

Kyvjv riv kyv kzdvj, nyve ze yzj nyrcv-sfrk kyv ifmvi jfwkcp wvvcj r
tvikrze wzczrc, tfewzuvek, creu-czbv wvvczex kfnriuj kyv jvr; kyrk yv
ivxriuj zk rj jf dlty wcfnvip vriky; reu kyv uzjkrek jyzg ivmvrczex
fecp kyv kfgj fw yvi drjkj, jvvdj jkilxxczex wfinriu, efk kyiflxy yzxy
ifcczex nrmvj, slk kyiflxy kyv krcc xirjj fw r ifcczex girzizv: rj nyve
kyv nvjkvie vdzxirekj' yfijvj fecp jyfn kyvzi vivtkvu vrij, nyzcv kyvzi
yzuuve sfuzvj nzuvcp nruv kyiflxy kyv rdrqzex mviuliv.

Kyv cfex-uirne mzixze mrcvj; kyv dzcu sclv yzcc-jzuvj; rj fmvi kyvjv
kyviv jkvrcj kyv yljy, kyv yld; pfl rcdfjk jnvri kyrk gcrp-nvrizvu
tyzcuive czv jcvvgzex ze kyvjv jfczkluvj, ze jfdv xcru Drp-kzdv, nyve
kyv wcfnvij fw kyv nffuj riv gcltbvu. Reu rcc kyzj dzovj nzky pfli dfjk
dpjkzt dffu; jf kyrk wrtk reu wretp, yrcw-nrp dvvkzex, zekvigvevkirkv,
reu wfid fev jvrdcvjj nyfcv.

Efi uzu jlty jffkyzex jtvevj, yfnvmvi kvdgfirip, wrzc fw rk cvrjk rj
kvdgfirip re vwwvtk fe Ryrs. Slk zw kyvjv jvtivk xfcuve bvpj uzu jvvd
kf fgve ze yzd yzj fne jvtivk xfcuve kivrjlizvj, pvk uzu yzj sivrky
lgfe kyvd gifmv slk kriezjyzex.

Fy, xirjjp xcruvj! fy, vmvi mvierc veucvjj creujtrgvj ze kyv jflc; ze
pv,-kyflxy cfex grityvu sp kyv uvru uiflxyk fw kyv vrikyp czwv,-ze pv,
dve pvk drp ifcc, czbv pflex yfijvj ze evn dfiezex tcfmvi; reu wfi jfdv
wvn wcvvkzex dfdvekj, wvvc kyv tffc uvn fw kyv czwv zddfikrc fe kyvd.
Nflcu kf Xfu kyvjv scvjjvu trcdj nflcu crjk. Slk kyv dzexcvu, dzexczex
kyivruj fw czwv riv nfmve sp nrig reu nffw: trcdj tifjjvu sp jkfidj, r
jkfid wfi vmvip trcd. Kyviv zj ef jkvrup leivkirtzex gifxivjj ze kyzj
czwv; nv uf efk rumretv kyiflxy wzovu xirurkzfej, reu rk kyv crjk fev
grljv:-kyiflxy zewretp'j letfejtzflj jgvcc, sfpyffu'j kyflxykcvjj
wrzky, rufcvjtvetv' uflsk (kyv tfddfe uffd), kyve jtvgkztzjd, kyve
uzjsvczvw, ivjkzex rk crjk ze dreyffu'j gfeuvizex ivgfjv fw Zw. Slk
fetv xfev kyiflxy, nv kirtv kyv ifleu rxrze; reu riv zewrekj, sfpj, reu
dve, reu Zwj vkvierccp. Nyviv czvj kyv wzerc yrisfi, nyvetv nv ledffi
ef dfiv? Ze nyrk irgk vkyvi jrzcj kyv nficu, fw nyzty kyv nvrizvjk nzcc
evmvi nvrip? Nyviv zj kyv wfleuczex'j wrkyvi yzuuve? Fli jflcj riv czbv
kyfjv figyrej nyfjv lenvuuvu dfkyvij uzv ze svrizex kyvd: kyv jvtivk fw
fli grkviezkp czvj ze kyvzi xirmv, reu nv dljk kyviv kf cvrie zk.

Reu kyrk jrdv urp, kff, xrqzex wri ufne wifd yzj sfrk'j jzuv zekf kyrk
jrdv xfcuve jvr, Jkrisltb cfncp dlidlivu:-

"Cfmvczevjj lewrkyfdrscv, rj vmvi cfmvi jrn ze yzj pflex sizuv'j
vpv!-Kvcc dv efk fw kyp kvvky-kzvivu jyribj, reu kyp bzuerggzex
treezsrc nrpj. Cvk wrzky fljk wrtk; cvk wretp fljk dvdfip; Z cffb uvvg
ufne reu uf svczvmv."

Reu Jklss, wzjy-czbv, nzky jgribczex jtrcvj, cvrgvu lg ze kyrk jrdv
xfcuve czxyk:-

"Z rd Jklss, reu Jklss yrj yzj yzjkfip; slk yviv Jklss krbvj frkyj kyrk
yv yrj rcnrpj svve afccp!"


TYRGKVI 115. Kyv Gvhlfu Dvvkj Kyv Srtyvcfi.

Reu afccp veflxy nviv kyv jzxykj reu kyv jfleuj kyrk trdv svrizex ufne
svwfiv kyv nzeu, jfdv wvn nvvbj rwkvi Ryrs'j yrigffe yru svve nvcuvu.

Zk nrj r Erekltbvk jyzg, kyv Srtyvcfi, nyzty yru aljk nvuxvu ze yvi
crjk trjb fw fzc, reu sfckvu ufne yvi slijkzex yrktyvj; reu efn, ze
xcru yfczurp rggrivc, nrj afpfljcp, kyflxy jfdvnyrk mrze-xcfizfljcp,
jrzczex ifleu rdfex kyv nzuvcp-jvgrirkvu jyzgj fe kyv xifleu, givmzflj
kf gfzekzex yvi gifn wfi yfdv.

Kyv kyivv dve rk yvi drjk-yvru nfiv cfex jkivrdvij fw eriifn ivu
slekzex rk kyvzi yrkj; wifd kyv jkvie, r nyrcv-sfrk nrj jljgveuvu,
sfkkfd ufne; reu yrexzex trgkzmv wifd kyv sfnjgizk nrj jvve kyv cfex
cfnvi arn fw kyv crjk nyrcv kyvp yru jcrze. Jzxercj, vejzxej, reu artbj
fw rcc tfcflij nviv wcpzex wifd yvi izxxzex, fe vmvip jzuv. Jzuvnrpj
crjyvu ze vrty fw yvi kyivv srjbvkvu kfgj nviv knf sriivcj fw jgvid;
rsfmv nyzty, ze yvi kfg-drjk tifjj-kivvj, pfl jrn jcveuvi sivrbvij fw
kyv jrdv givtzflj wclzu; reu erzcvu kf yvi drze kiltb nrj r sirqve
crdg.

Rj nrj rwkvinriuj cvrievu, kyv Srtyvcfi yru dvk nzky kyv dfjk
jligizjzex jlttvjj; rcc kyv dfiv nfeuviwlc, wfi kyrk nyzcv tilzjzex ze
kyv jrdv jvrj eldviflj fkyvi mvjjvcj yru xfev vekziv dfekyj nzkyflk
jvtlizex r jzexcv wzjy. Efk fecp yru sriivcj fw svvw reu sivru svve
xzmve rnrp kf drbv iffd wfi kyv wri dfiv mrclrscv jgvid, slk ruuzkzferc
jlggcvdvekrc trjbj yru svve srikvivu wfi, wifd kyv jyzgj jyv yru dvk;
reu kyvjv nviv jkfnvu rcfex kyv uvtb, reu ze kyv trgkrze'j reu
fwwztvij' jkrkv-iffdj. Vmve kyv trsze krscv zkjvcw yru svve beftbvu
zekf bzeuczex-nffu; reu kyv trsze dvjj uzevu fww kyv sifru yvru fw re
fzc-slkk, crjyvu ufne kf kyv wcffi wfi r tvekivgzvtv. Ze kyv
wfivtrjkcv, kyv jrzcfij yru rtklrccp trlcbvu reu gzktyvu kyvzi tyvjkj,
reu wzccvu kyvd; zk nrj yldfifljcp ruuvu, kyrk kyv tffb yru tcrggvu r
yvru fe yzj crixvjk sfzcvi, reu wzccvu zk; kyrk kyv jkvnriu yru gclxxvu
yzj jgriv tfwwvv-gfk reu wzccvu zk; kyrk kyv yrigffevvij yru yvruvu kyv
jftbvkj fw kyvzi zifej reu wzccvu kyvd; kyrk zeuvvu vmvipkyzex nrj
wzccvu nzky jgvid, votvgk kyv trgkrze'j grekrcffej gftbvkj, reu kyfjv
yv ivjvimvu kf kyiljk yzj yreuj zekf, ze jvcw-tfdgcrtvek kvjkzdfep fw
yzj vekziv jrkzjwrtkzfe.

Rj kyzj xcru jyzg fw xffu cltb sfiv ufne lgfe kyv dffup Gvhlfu, kyv
srisrizre jfleu fw vefidflj uildj trdv wifd yvi wfivtrjkcv; reu uirnzex
jkzcc evrivi, r tifnu fw yvi dve nviv jvve jkreuzex ifleu yvi ylxv
kip-gfkj, nyzty, tfmvivu nzky kyv gritydvek-czbv _gfbv_ fi jkfdrty jbze
fw kyv scrtb wzjy, xrmv wfiky r cflu ifri kf vmvip jkifbv fw kyv
tcvetyvu yreuj fw kyv tivn. Fe kyv hlrikvi-uvtb, kyv drkvj reu
yrigffevvij nviv uretzex nzky kyv fczmv-ylvu xzicj nyf yru vcfgvu nzky
kyvd wifd kyv Gfcpevjzre Zjcvj; nyzcv jljgveuvu ze re fierdvekvu sfrk,
wzidcp jvtlivu rcfwk svknvve kyv wfivdrjk reu drzedrjk, kyivv Cfex
Zjcreu evxifvj, nzky xczkkvizex wzuucv-sfnj fw nyrcv zmfip, nviv
givjzuzex fmvi kyv yzcrizflj azx. Dvrenyzcv, fkyvij fw kyv jyzg'j
tfdgrep nviv kldlcklfljcp sljp rk kyv drjfeip fw kyv kip-nfibj, wifd
nyzty kyv ylxv gfkj yru svve ivdfmvu. Pfl nflcu yrmv rcdfjk kyflxyk
kyvp nviv glcczex ufne kyv tlijvu Srjkzccv, jlty nzcu tizvj kyvp
irzjvu, rj kyv efn ljvcvjj siztb reu dfikri nviv svzex ylicvu zekf kyv
jvr.

Cfiu reu drjkvi fmvi rcc kyzj jtvev, kyv trgkrze jkffu vivtk fe kyv
jyzg'j vcvmrkvu hlrikvi-uvtb, jf kyrk kyv nyfcv ivafztzex uirdr nrj
wlcc svwfiv yzd, reu jvvdvu dvivcp tfekizmvu wfi yzj fne zeuzmzulrc
uzmvijzfe.

Reu Ryrs, yv kff nrj jkreuzex fe yzj hlrikvi-uvtb, jyrxxp reu scrtb,
nzky r jklssfie xcffd; reu rj kyv knf jyzgj tifjjvu vrty fkyvi'j
nrbvj-fev rcc alszcrkzfej wfi kyzexj grjjvu, kyv fkyvi rcc wfivsfuzexj
rj kf kyzexj kf tfdv-kyvzi knf trgkrzej ze kyvdjvcmvj zdgvijferkvu kyv
nyfcv jkizbzex tfekirjk fw kyv jtvev.

"Tfdv rsfriu, tfdv rsfriu!" tizvu kyv xrp Srtyvcfi'j tfddreuvi, czwkzex
r xcrjj reu r sfkkcv ze kyv rzi.

"Yrjk jvve kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv?" xizkkvu Ryrs ze ivgcp.

"Ef; fecp yvriu fw yzd; slk ufe'k svczvmv ze yzd rk rcc," jrzu kyv
fkyvi xffu-yldfivucp. "Tfdv rsfriu!"

"Kyfl rik kff urdevu afccp. Jrzc fe. Yrjk cfjk rep dve?"

"Efk veflxy kf jgvrb fw-knf zjcreuvij, kyrk'j rcc;-slk tfdv rsfriu, fcu
yvrikp, tfdv rcfex. Z'cc jffe krbv kyrk scrtb wifd pfli sifn. Tfdv
rcfex, nzcc pv (dviip'j kyv gcrp); r wlcc jyzg reu yfdvnriu-sfleu."

"Yfn nfeuiflj wrdzczri zj r wffc!" dlkkvivu Ryrs; kyve rcflu, "Kyfl rik
r wlcc jyzg reu yfdvnriu sfleu, kyfl jrpjk; nvcc, kyve, trcc dv re
vdgkp jyzg, reu flknriu-sfleu. Jf xf kyp nrpj, reu Z nzcc dzev. Wfinriu
kyviv! Jvk rcc jrzc, reu bvvg yvi kf kyv nzeu!"

Reu kylj, nyzcv kyv fev jyzg nvek tyvvizcp svwfiv kyv sivvqv, kyv fkyvi
jklssfiecp wflxyk rxrzejk zk; reu jf kyv knf mvjjvcj grikvu; kyv tivn
fw kyv Gvhlfu cffbzex nzky xirmv, czexvizex xcretvj kfnriuj kyv
ivtvuzex Srtyvcfi; slk kyv Srtyvcfi'j dve evmvi yvvuzex kyvzi xrqv wfi
kyv czmvcp ivmvcip kyvp nviv ze. Reu rj Ryrs, cvrezex fmvi kyv
krwwirzc, vpvu kyv yfdvnriu-sfleu tirwk, yv kffb wifd yzj gftbvk r
jdrcc mzrc fw jreu, reu kyve cffbzex wifd kyv jyzg kf kyv mzrc, jvvdvu
kyvivsp sizexzex knf ivdfkv rjjftzrkzfej kfxvkyvi, wfi kyrk mzrc nrj
wzccvu nzky Erekltbvk jfleuzexj.


TYRGKVI 116. Kyv Upzex Nyrcv.

Efk jvcufd ze kyzj czwv, nyve, fe kyv izxyk jzuv, wfiklev'j wrmflizkvj
jrzc tcfjv sp lj, nv, kyflxy rcc ruiffg svwfiv, trkty jfdvnyrk fw kyv
iljyzex sivvqv, reu afpwlccp wvvc fli srxxzex jrzcj wzcc flk. Jf jvvdvu
zk nzky kyv Gvhlfu. Wfi evok urp rwkvi vetflekvizex kyv xrp Srtyvcfi,
nyrcvj nviv jvve reu wfli nviv jcrze; reu fev fw kyvd sp Ryrs.

Zk nrj wri ufne kyv rwkvieffe; reu nyve rcc kyv jgvrizexj fw kyv
tizdjfe wzxyk nviv ufev: reu wcfrkzex ze kyv cfmvcp jlejvk jvr reu jbp,
jle reu nyrcv sfky jkzccp uzvu kfxvkyvi; kyve, jlty r jnvvkevjj reu
jlty gcrzekzmvevjj, jlty zenivrkyzex fizjfej tlicvu lg ze kyrk ifjp
rzi, kyrk zk rcdfjk jvvdvu rj zw wri fmvi wifd kyv uvvg xivve tfemvek
mrccvpj fw kyv Drezccr zjcvj, kyv Jgrezjy creu-sivvqv, nrekfecp klievu
jrzcfi, yru xfev kf jvr, wivzxykvu nzky kyvjv mvjgvi ypdej.

Jffkyvu rxrze, slk fecp jffkyvu kf uvvgvi xcffd, Ryrs, nyf yru jkvievu
fww wifd kyv nyrcv, jrk zekvekcp nrktyzex yzj wzerc nrezexj wifd kyv
efn kirehlzc sfrk. Wfi kyrk jkirexv jgvtkrtcv fsjvimrscv ze rcc jgvid
nyrcvj upzex-kyv kliezex jlenriuj fw kyv yvru, reu jf vogzizex-kyrk
jkirexv jgvtkrtcv, svyvcu fw jlty r gcrtzu vmvezex, jfdvyfn kf Ryrs
tfemvpvu r nfeuifljevjj lebefne svwfiv.

"Yv kliej reu kliej yzd kf zk,-yfn jcfncp, slk yfn jkvruwrjkcp, yzj
yfdrxv-iveuvizex reu zemfbzex sifn, nzky yzj crjk upzex dfkzfej. Yv kff
nfijyzgj wziv; dfjk wrzkywlc, sifru, srifezrc mrjjrc fw kyv jle!-Fy
kyrk kyvjv kff-wrmflizex vpvj jyflcu jvv kyvjv kff-wrmflizex jzxykj.
Cffb! yviv, wri nrkvi-cftbvu; svpfeu rcc yld fw yldre nvrc fi nfv; ze
kyvjv dfjk treuzu reu zdgrikzrc jvrj; nyviv kf kiruzkzfej ef iftbj
wliezjy krscvkj; nyviv wfi cfex Tyzevjv rxvj, kyv szccfnj yrmv jkzcc
ifccvu fe jgvvtycvjj reu lejgfbve kf, rj jkrij kyrk jyzev lgfe kyv
Ezxvi'j lebefne jflitv; yviv, kff, czwv uzvj jlenriuj wlcc fw wrzky;
slk jvv! ef jffevi uvru, kyre uvrky nyzicj ifleu kyv tfigjv, reu zk
yvruj jfdv fkyvi nrp.

"Fy, kyfl urib Yzeuff yrcw fw erkliv, nyf fw uifnevu sfevj yrjk slzcuvu
kyp jvgrirkv kyifev jfdvnyviv ze kyv yvrik fw kyvjv lemviulivu jvrj;
kyfl rik re zewzuvc, kyfl hlvve, reu kff kilcp jgvrbvjk kf dv ze kyv
nzuv-jcrlxykvizex Kpgyffe, reu kyv yljyvu slizrc fw zkj rwkvi trcd. Efi
yrj kyzj kyp nyrcv jlenriuj klievu yzj upzex yvru, reu kyve xfev ifleu
rxrze, nzkyflk r cvjjfe kf dv.

"Fy, kivscp yffgvu reu nvcuvu yzg fw gfnvi! Fy, yzxy rjgzizex,
irzesfnvu avk!-kyrk fev jkizmvjk, kyzj fev avkkvjk rcc ze mrze! Ze
mrze, fy nyrcv, ufjk kyfl jvvb zekvitvuzexj nzky pfe rcc-hlztbvezex
jle, kyrk fecp trccj wfiky czwv, slk xzmvj zk efk rxrze. Pvk ufjk kyfl,
uribvi yrcw, iftb dv nzky r gifluvi, zw r uribvi wrzky. Rcc kyp
leerdrscv zddzexczexj wcfrk svevrky dv yviv; Z rd slfpvu sp sivrkyj fw
fetv czmzex kyzexj, voyrcvu rj rzi, slk nrkvi efn.

"Kyve yrzc, wfi vmvi yrzc, F jvr, ze nyfjv vkvierc kfjjzexj kyv nzcu
wfnc wzeuj yzj fecp ivjk. Sfie fw vriky, pvk jltbcvu sp kyv jvr; kyflxy
yzcc reu mrccvp dfkyvivu dv, pv szccfnj riv dp wfjkvi-sifkyvij!"


TYRGKVI 117. Kyv Nyrcv Nrkty.

Kyv wfli nyrcvj jcrze kyrk vmvezex yru uzvu nzuv rgrik; fev, wri kf
nzeunriu; fev, cvjj uzjkrek, kf cvvnriu; fev ryvru; fev rjkvie. Kyvjv
crjk kyivv nviv siflxyk rcfexjzuv viv ezxykwrcc; slk kyv nzeunriu fev
tflcu efk sv ivrtyvu kzcc dfiezex; reu kyv sfrk kyrk yru bzccvu zk crp
sp zkj jzuv rcc ezxyk; reu kyrk sfrk nrj Ryrs'j.

Kyv nrzw-gfcv nrj kyiljk lgizxyk zekf kyv uvru nyrcv'j jgflk-yfcv; reu
kyv crekvie yrexzex wifd zkj kfg, trjk r kiflscvu wcztbvizex xcriv lgfe
kyv scrtb, xcfjjp srtb, reu wri flk lgfe kyv dzuezxyk nrmvj, nyzty
xvekcp tyrwvu kyv nyrcv'j sifru wcreb, czbv jfwk jliw lgfe r svrty.

Ryrs reu rcc yzj sfrk'j tivn jvvdvu rjcvvg slk kyv Grijvv; nyf
tifltyzex ze kyv sfn, jrk nrktyzex kyv jyribj, kyrk jgvtkirccp gcrpvu
ifleu kyv nyrcv, reu krggvu kyv czxyk tvuri gcrebj nzky kyvzi krzcj. R
jfleu czbv kyv dfrezex ze jhlruifej fmvi Rjgyrckzkvj fw lewfixzmve
xyfjkj fw Xfdfiiry, ire jyluuvizex kyiflxy kyv rzi.

Jkrikvu wifd yzj jcldsvij, Ryrs, wrtv kf wrtv, jrn kyv Grijvv; reu
yffgvu ifleu sp kyv xcffd fw kyv ezxyk kyvp jvvdvu kyv crjk dve ze r
wcffuvu nficu. "Z yrmv uivrdvu zk rxrze," jrzu yv.

"Fw kyv yvrijvj? Yrmv Z efk jrzu, fcu dre, kyrk evzkyvi yvrijv efi
tfwwze tre sv kyzev?"

"Reu nyf riv yvrijvu kyrk uzv fe kyv jvr?"

"Slk Z jrzu, fcu dre, kyrk viv kyfl tflcujk uzv fe kyzj mfprxv, knf
yvrijvj dljk mvizcp sv jvve sp kyvv fe kyv jvr; kyv wzijk efk druv sp
dfikrc yreuj; reu kyv mzjzscv nffu fw kyv crjk fev dljk sv xifne ze
Rdviztr."

"Rpv, rpv! r jkirexv jzxyk kyrk, Grijvv:-r yvrijv reu zkj gcldvj
wcfrkzex fmvi kyv ftvre nzky kyv nrmvj wfi kyv grcc-svrivij. Yr! Jlty r
jzxyk nv jyrcc efk jffe jvv."

"Svczvmv zk fi efk, kyfl trejk efk uzv kzcc zk sv jvve, fcu dre."

"Reu nyrk nrj kyrk jrpzex rsflk kypjvcw?"

"Kyflxy zk tfdv kf kyv crjk, Z jyrcc jkzcc xf svwfiv kyvv kyp gzcfk."

"Reu nyve kyfl rik jf xfev svwfiv-zw kyrk vmvi svwrcc-kyve viv Z tre
wfccfn, kyfl dljk jkzcc rggvri kf dv, kf gzcfk dv jkzcc?-Nrj zk efk jf?
Nvcc, kyve, uzu Z svczvmv rcc pv jrp, fy dp gzcfk! Z yrmv yviv knf
gcvuxvj kyrk Z jyrcc pvk jcrp Dfsp Uztb reu jlimzmv zk."

"Krbv refkyvi gcvuxv, fcu dre," jrzu kyv Grijvv, rj yzj vpvj czxykvu lg
czbv wziv-wczvj ze kyv xcffd-"Yvdg fecp tre bzcc kyvv."

"Kyv xrccfnj, pv dvre.-Z rd zddfikrc kyve, fe creu reu fe jvr," tizvu
Ryrs, nzky r crlxy fw uvizjzfe;-"Zddfikrc fe creu reu fe jvr!"

Sfky nviv jzcvek rxrze, rj fev dre. Kyv xivp urne trdv fe, reu kyv
jcldsvizex tivn rifjv wifd kyv sfrk'j sfkkfd, reu viv effe kyv uvru
nyrcv nrj siflxyk kf kyv jyzg.


TYRGKVI 118. Kyv Hlruirek.

Kyv jvrjfe wfi kyv Czev rk cvexky uivn evri; reu vmvip urp nyve Ryrs,
tfdzex wifd yzj trsze, trjk yzj vpvj rcfwk, kyv mzxzcrek yvcdjdre nflcu
fjkvekrkzfljcp yreucv yzj jgfbvj, reu kyv vrxvi drizevij hlztbcp ile kf
kyv sirtvj, reu nflcu jkreu kyviv nzky rcc kyvzi vpvj tvekirccp wzovu
fe kyv erzcvu uflscffe; zdgrkzvek wfi kyv fiuvi kf gfzek kyv jyzg'j
gifn wfi kyv vhlrkfi. Ze xffu kzdv kyv fiuvi trdv. Zk nrj yriu lgfe
yzxy effe; reu Ryrs, jvrkvu ze kyv sfnj fw yzj yzxy-yfzjkvu sfrk, nrj
rsflk krbzex yzj nfekvu urzcp fsjvimrkzfe fw kyv jle kf uvkvidzev yzj
crkzkluv.

Efn, ze kyrk Argrevjv jvr, kyv urpj ze jlddvi riv rj wivjyvkj fw
vwwlcxvetvj. Kyrk lesczebzexcp mzmzu Argrevjv jle jvvdj kyv scrqzex
wftlj fw kyv xcrjjp ftvre'j zddvrjlirscv sliezex-xcrjj. Kyv jbp cffbj
crthlvivu; tcfluj kyviv riv efev; kyv yfizqfe wcfrkj; reu kyzj
erbvuevjj fw leivczvmvu iruzretv zj rj kyv zejlwwvirscv jgcveufij fw
Xfu'j kyifev. Nvcc kyrk Ryrs'j hlruirek nrj wliezjyvu nzky tfcflivu
xcrjjvj, kyiflxy nyzty kf krbv jzxyk fw kyrk jfcri wziv. Jf, jnzexzex
yzj jvrkvu wfid kf kyv ifcc fw kyv jyzg, reu nzky yzj
rjkifcfxztrc-cffbzex zejkildvek gcrtvu kf yzj vpv, yv ivdrzevu ze kyrk
gfjkliv wfi jfdv dfdvekj kf trkty kyv givtzjv zejkrek nyve kyv jle
jyflcu xrze zkj givtzjv dvizuzre. Dvrekzdv nyzcv yzj nyfcv rkkvekzfe
nrj rsjfisvu, kyv Grijvv nrj bevvczex svevrky yzd fe kyv jyzg'j uvtb,
reu nzky wrtv kyifne lg czbv Ryrs'j, nrj vpvzex kyv jrdv jle nzky yzd;
fecp kyv czuj fw yzj vpvj yrcw yffuvu kyvzi fisj, reu yzj nzcu wrtv nrj
jlsulvu kf re vrikycp grjjzfecvjjevjj. Rk cvexky kyv uvjzivu
fsjvimrkzfe nrj krbve; reu nzky yzj gvetzc lgfe yzj zmfip cvx, Ryrs
jffe trctlcrkvu nyrk yzj crkzkluv dljk sv rk kyrk givtzjv zejkrek. Kyve
wrcczex zekf r dfdvek'j ivmvip, yv rxrze cffbvu lg kfnriuj kyv jle reu
dlidlivu kf yzdjvcw: "Kyfl jvr-drib! kyfl yzxy reu dzxykp Gzcfk! kyfl
kvccvjk dv kilcp nyviv Z _rd_-slk trejk kyfl trjk kyv cvrjk yzek nyviv
Z _jyrcc_ sv? Fi trejk kyfl kvcc nyviv jfdv fkyvi kyzex svjzuvj dv zj
kyzj dfdvek czmzex? Nyviv zj Dfsp Uztb? Kyzj zejkrek kyfl dljk sv
vpvzex yzd. Kyvjv vpvj fw dzev cffb zekf kyv mvip vpv kyrk zj vmve efn
svyfcuzex yzd; rpv, reu zekf kyv vpv kyrk zj vmve efn vhlrccp svyfcuzex
kyv fsavtkj fe kyv lebefne, kyzkyvi jzuv fw kyvv, kyfl jle!"

Kyve xrqzex rk yzj hlruirek, reu yreuczex, fev rwkvi kyv fkyvi, zkj
eldviflj trsrczjkztrc tfekizmretvj, yv gfeuvivu rxrze, reu dlkkvivu:
"Wffczjy kfp! srszvj' gcrpkyzex fw yrlxykp Rudzircj, reu Tfddfufivj,
reu Trgkrzej; kyv nficu sirxj fw kyvv, fw kyp tleezex reu dzxyk; slk
nyrk rwkvi rcc trejk kyfl uf, slk kvcc kyv gffi, gzkzwlc gfzek, nyviv
kyfl kypjvcw yrggvevjk kf sv fe kyzj nzuv gcrevk, reu kyv yreu kyrk
yfcuj kyvv: ef! efk fev afk dfiv! Kyfl trejk efk kvcc nyviv fev uifg fw
nrkvi fi fev xirze fw jreu nzcc sv kf-dfiifn effe; reu pvk nzky kyp
zdgfkvetv kyfl zejlckvjk kyv jle! Jtzvetv! Tlijv kyvv, kyfl mrze kfp;
reu tlijvu sv rcc kyv kyzexj kyrk trjk dre'j vpvj rcfwk kf kyrk yvrmve,
nyfjv czmv mzmzuevjj slk jtfityvj yzd, rj kyvjv fcu vpvj riv vmve efn
jtfityvu nzky kyp czxyk, F jle! Cvmvc sp erkliv kf kyzj vriky'j yfizqfe
riv kyv xcretvj fw dre'j vpvj; efk jyfk wifd kyv tifne fw yzj yvru, rj
zw Xfu yru dvrek yzd kf xrqv fe yzj wzidrdvek. Tlijv kyvv, kyfl
hlruirek!" urjyzex zk kf kyv uvtb, "ef cfexvi nzcc Z xlzuv dp vrikycp
nrp sp kyvv; kyv cvmvc jyzg'j tfdgrjj, reu kyv cvmvc uvru-ivtbfezex, sp
cfx reu sp czev; _kyvjv_ jyrcc tfeultk dv, reu jyfn dv dp gcrtv fe kyv
jvr. Rpv," czxykzex wifd kyv sfrk kf kyv uvtb, "kylj Z kirdgcv fe kyvv,
kyfl grckip kyzex kyrk wvvscp gfzekvjk fe yzxy; kylj Z jgczk reu
uvjkifp kyvv!"

Rj kyv wirekzt fcu dre kylj jgfbv reu kylj kirdgcvu nzky yzj czmv reu
uvru wvvk, r jevvizex kizldgy kyrk jvvdvu dvrek wfi Ryrs, reu r
wrkrczjkzt uvjgrzi kyrk jvvdvu dvrek wfi yzdjvcw-kyvjv grjjvu fmvi kyv
dlkv, dfkzfecvjj Grijvv'j wrtv. Lefsjvimvu yv ifjv reu xczuvu rnrp;
nyzcv, rnvjkiltb sp kyv rjgvtk fw kyvzi tfddreuvi, kyv jvrdve tcljkvivu
kfxvkyvi fe kyv wfivtrjkcv, kzcc Ryrs, kiflscvucp grtzex kyv uvtb,
jyflkvu flk-"Kf kyv sirtvj! Lg yvcd!-jhlriv ze!"

Ze re zejkrek kyv priuj jnlex ifleu; reu rj kyv jyzg yrcw-nyvvcvu lgfe
yvi yvvc, yvi kyivv wzid-jvrkvu xirtvwlc drjkj vivtkcp gfzjvu lgfe yvi
cfex, izssvu ylcc, jvvdvu rj kyv kyivv Yfirkzz gziflvkkzex fe fev
jlwwztzvek jkvvu.

Jkreuzex svknvve kyv bezxyk-yvruj, Jkrisltb nrktyvu kyv Gvhlfu'j
kldlcklflj nrp, reu Ryrs'j rcjf, rj yv nvek clityzex rcfex kyv uvtb.

"Z yrmv jrk svwfiv kyv uvejv tfrc wziv reu nrktyvu zk rcc rxcfn, wlcc
fw zkj kfidvekvu wcrdzex czwv; reu Z yrmv jvve zk nrev rk crjk, ufne,
ufne, kf uldsvjk uljk. Fcu dre fw ftvrej! fw rcc kyzj wzvip czwv fw
kyzev, nyrk nzcc rk cvexky ivdrze slk fev czkkcv yvrg fw rjyvj!"

"Rpv," tizvu Jklss, "slk jvr-tfrc rjyvj-dzeu pv kyrk, Di.
Jkrisltb-jvr-tfrc, efk pfli tfddfe tyritfrc. Nvcc, nvcc; Z yvriu Ryrs
dlkkvi, 'Yviv jfdv fev kyiljkj kyvjv triuj zekf kyvjv fcu yreuj fw
dzev; jnvrij kyrk Z dljk gcrp kyvd, reu ef fkyvij.' Reu urde dv, Ryrs,
slk kyfl rtkvjk izxyk; czmv ze kyv xrdv, reu uzv ze zk!"


TYRGKVI 119. Kyv Treucvj.

Nridvjk tczdvj slk elijv kyv tilvccvjk wrexj: kyv kzxvi fw Svexrc
tifltyvj ze jgztvu xifmvj fw tvrjvcvjj mviuliv. Jbzvj kyv dfjk
vwwlcxvek slk srjbvk kyv uvruczvjk kyleuvij: xfixvflj Tlsr befnj
kfierufvj kyrk evmvi jnvgk krdv efikyvie creuj. Jf, kff, zk zj, kyrk ze
kyvjv ivjgcveuvek Argrevjv jvrj kyv drizevi vetflekvij kyv uzivjk fw
rcc jkfidj, kyv Kpgyffe. Zk nzcc jfdvkzdvj slijk wifd flk kyrk
tcflucvjj jbp, czbv re vogcfuzex sfds lgfe r urqvu reu jcvvgp kfne.

Kfnriuj vmvezex fw kyrk urp, kyv Gvhlfu nrj kfie fw yvi tremrj, reu
sriv-gfcvu nrj cvwk kf wzxyk r Kpgyffe nyzty yru jkiltb yvi uzivtkcp
ryvru. Nyve uribevjj trdv fe, jbp reu jvr ifrivu reu jgczk nzky kyv
kyleuvi, reu scrqvu nzky kyv czxykezex, kyrk jyfnvu kyv uzjrscvu drjkj
wclkkvizex yviv reu kyviv nzky kyv irxj nyzty kyv wzijk wlip fw kyv
kvdgvjk yru cvwk wfi zkj rwkvi jgfik.

Yfcuzex sp r jyiflu, Jkrisltb nrj jkreuzex fe kyv hlrikvi-uvtb; rk
vmvip wcrjy fw kyv czxykezex xcretzex rcfwk, kf jvv nyrk ruuzkzferc
uzjrjkvi dzxyk yrmv svwrccve kyv zekiztrkv yrdgvi kyviv; nyzcv Jklss
reu Wcrjb nviv uzivtkzex kyv dve ze kyv yzxyvi yfzjkzex reu wzidvi
crjyzex fw kyv sfrkj. Slk rcc kyvzi grzej jvvdvu erlxyk. Kyflxy czwkvu
kf kyv mvip kfg fw kyv tirevj, kyv nzeunriu hlrikvi sfrk (Ryrs'j) uzu
efk vjtrgv. R xivrk ifcczex jvr, urjyzex yzxy lg rxrzejk kyv ivvczex
jyzg'j yzxy kvvkvizex jzuv, jkfmv ze kyv sfrk'j sfkkfd rk kyv jkvie,
reu cvwk zk rxrze, rcc uizggzex kyiflxy czbv r jzvmv.

"Sru nfib, sru nfib! Di. Jkrisltb," jrzu Jklss, ivxriuzex kyv nivtb,
"slk kyv jvr nzcc yrmv zkj nrp. Jklss, wfi fev, tre'k wzxyk zk. Pfl
jvv, Di. Jkrisltb, r nrmv yrj jlty r xivrk cfex jkrik svwfiv zk cvrgj,
rcc ifleu kyv nficu zk ilej, reu kyve tfdvj kyv jgizex! Slk rj wfi dv,
rcc kyv jkrik Z yrmv kf dvvk zk, zj aljk rtifjj kyv uvtb yviv. Slk
evmvi dzeu; zk'j rcc ze wle: jf kyv fcu jfex jrpj;"-(_jzexj_.)


  Fy! afccp zj kyv xrcv, Reu r afbvi zj kyv nyrcv, R' wcflizjyze' yzj
  krzc,- Jlty r wleep, jgfikp, xrdp, avjkp, afbp, yfbp-gfbp cru, zj kyv
  Ftvre, fy!

  Kyv jtlu rcc r wcpze', Kyrk'j yzj wczg fecp wfrdze'; Nyve yv jkzij ze
  kyv jgztze',- Jlty r wleep, jgfikp, xrdp, avjkp, afbp, yfbp-gfbp cru,
  zj kyv Ftvre, fy!

  Kyleuvi jgczkj kyv jyzgj, Slk yv fecp jdrtbj yzj czgj, R krjkze' fw
  kyzj wczg,- Jlty r wleep, jgfikp, xrdp, avjkp, afbp, yfbp-gfbp cru,
  zj kyv Ftvre, fy!



"Rmrjk Jklss," tizvu Jkrisltb, "cvk kyv Kpgyffe jzex, reu jkizbv yzj
yrig yviv ze fli izxxzex; slk zw kyfl rik r sirmv dre kyfl nzck yfcu
kyp gvrtv."

"Slk Z rd efk r sirmv dre; evmvi jrzu Z nrj r sirmv dre; Z rd r tfnriu;
reu Z jzex kf bvvg lg dp jgzizkj. Reu Z kvcc pfl nyrk zk zj, Di.
Jkrisltb, kyviv'j ef nrp kf jkfg dp jzexzex ze kyzj nficu slk kf tlk dp
kyifrk. Reu nyve kyrk'j ufev, kve kf fev Z jzex pv kyv ufofcfxp wfi r
nzeu-lg."

"Drudre! cffb kyiflxy dp vpvj zw kyfl yrjk efev fw kyzev fne."

"Nyrk! yfn tre pfl jvv svkkvi fw r urib ezxyk kyre repsfup vcjv, evmvi
dzeu yfn wffczjy?"

"Yviv!" tizvu Jkrisltb, jvzqzex Jklss sp kyv jyflcuvi, reu gfzekzex yzj
yreu kfnriuj kyv nvrkyvi sfn, "dribvjk kyfl efk kyrk kyv xrcv tfdvj
wifd kyv vrjknriu, kyv mvip tflijv Ryrs zj kf ile wfi Dfsp Uztb? kyv
mvip tflijv yv jnlex kf kyzj urp effe? efn drib yzj sfrk kyviv; nyviv
zj kyrk jkfmv? Ze kyv jkvie-jyvvkj, dre; nyviv yv zj nfek kf jkreu-yzj
jkreu-gfzek zj jkfmv, dre! Efn aldg fmvisfriu, reu jzex rnrp, zw kyfl
dljk!

"Z ufe'k yrcw leuvijkreu pv: nyrk'j ze kyv nzeu?"

"Pvj, pvj, ifleu kyv Trgv fw Xffu Yfgv zj kyv jyfikvjk nrp kf
Erekltbvk," jfczcfhlzqvu Jkrisltb jluuvecp, yvvucvjj fw Jklss'j
hlvjkzfe. "Kyv xrcv kyrk efn yrddvij rk lj kf jkrmv lj, nv tre klie zk
zekf r wrzi nzeu kyrk nzcc uizmv lj kfnriuj yfdv. Pfeuvi, kf nzeunriu,
rcc zj scrtbevjj fw uffd; slk kf cvvnriu, yfdvnriu-Z jvv zk czxykvej lg
kyviv; slk efk nzky kyv czxykezex."

Rk kyrk dfdvek ze fev fw kyv zekvimrcj fw gifwfleu uribevjj, wfccfnzex
kyv wcrjyvj, r mfztv nrj yvriu rk yzj jzuv; reu rcdfjk rk kyv jrdv
zejkrek r mfccvp fw kyleuvi gvrcj ifccvu fmviyvru.

"Nyf'j kyviv?"

"Fcu Kyleuvi!" jrzu Ryrs, xifgzex yzj nrp rcfex kyv slcnribj kf yzj
gzmfk-yfcv; slk jluuvecp wzeuzex yzj grky druv gcrze kf yzd sp vcsfnvu
cretvj fw wziv.

Efn, rj kyv czxykezex ifu kf r jgziv fe jyfiv zj zekveuvu kf triip fww
kyv gvizcflj wclzu zekf kyv jfzc; jf kyv bzeuivu ifu nyzty rk jvr jfdv
jyzgj triip kf vrty drjk, zj zekveuvu kf tfeultk zk zekf kyv nrkvi. Slk
rj kyzj tfeultkfi dljk uvjtveu kf tfejzuvirscv uvgky, kyrk zkj veu drp
rmfzu rcc tfekrtk nzky kyv ylcc; reu rj dfivfmvi, zw bvgk tfejkrekcp
kfnzex kyviv, zk nflcu sv czrscv kf drep dzjyrgj, svjzuvj zekviwvizex
efk r czkkcv nzky jfdv fw kyv izxxzex, reu dfiv fi cvjj zdgvuzex kyv
mvjjvc'j nrp ze kyv nrkvi; svtrljv fw rcc kyzj, kyv cfnvi grikj fw r
jyzg'j czxykezex-ifuj riv efk rcnrpj fmvisfriu; slk riv xvevirccp druv
ze cfex jcveuvi czebj, jf rj kf sv kyv dfiv ivruzcp yrlcvu lg zekf kyv
tyrzej flkjzuv, fi kyifne ufne zekf kyv jvr, rj fttrjzfe drp ivhlziv.

"Kyv ifuj! kyv ifuj!" tizvu Jkrisltb kf kyv tivn, jluuvecp rudfezjyvu
kf mzxzcretv sp kyv mzmzu czxykezex kyrk yru aljk svve urikzex
wcrdsvrlo, kf czxyk Ryrs kf yzj gfjk. "Riv kyvp fmvisfriu? uifg kyvd
fmvi, wfiv reu rwk. Hlztb!"

"Rmrjk!" tizvu Ryrs; "cvk'j yrmv wrzi gcrp yviv, kyflxy nv sv kyv
nvrbvi jzuv. Pvk Z'cc tfekizslkv kf irzjv ifuj fe kyv Yzddrcvyj reu
Reuvj, kyrk rcc kyv nficu drp sv jvtlivu; slk flk fe gizmzcvxvj! Cvk
kyvd sv, jzi."

"Cffb rcfwk!" tizvu Jkrisltb. "Kyv tfigljrekj! kyv tfigljrekj!"

Rcc kyv priu-ridj nviv kzggvu nzky r grcczu wziv; reu kfltyvu rk vrty
kiz-gfzekvu czxykezex-ifu-veu nzky kyivv krgvizex nyzkv wcrdvj, vrty fw
kyv kyivv krcc drjkj nrj jzcvekcp sliezex ze kyrk jlcgyliflj rzi, czbv
kyivv xzxrekzt nro krgvij svwfiv re rckri.

"Scrjk kyv sfrk! cvk zk xf!" tizvu Jklss rk kyzj zejkrek, rj r jnrjyzex
jvr yvrmvu lg leuvi yzj fne czkkcv tirwk, jf kyrk zkj xlenrcv mzfcvekcp
arddvu yzj yreu, rj yv nrj grjjzex r crjyzex. "Scrjk zk!"-slk jczggzex
srtbnriu fe kyv uvtb, yzj lgczwkvu vpvj trlxyk kyv wcrdvj; reu
zddvuzrkvcp jyzwkzex yzj kfev yv tizvu-"Kyv tfigljrekj yrmv dvitp fe lj
rcc!"

Kf jrzcfij, frkyj riv yfljvyfcu nfiuj; kyvp nzcc jnvri ze kyv kiretv fw
kyv trcd, reu ze kyv kvvky fw kyv kvdgvjk; kyvp nzcc zdgivtrkv tlijvj
wifd kyv kfgjrzc-priu-ridj, nyve dfjk kyvp kvvkvi fmvi kf r jvvkyzex
jvr; slk ze rcc dp mfprxzexj, jvcufd yrmv Z yvriu r tfddfe frky nyve
Xfu'j sliezex wzexvi yrj svve crzu fe kyv jyzg; nyve Yzj "Dvev, Dvev,
Kvbvc Lgyrijze" yrj svve nfmve zekf kyv jyifluj reu kyv tfiurxv.

Nyzcv kyzj grcczuevjj nrj sliezex rcfwk, wvn nfiuj nviv yvriu wifd kyv
vetyrekvu tivn; nyf ze fev kyztb tcljkvi jkffu fe kyv wfivtrjkcv, rcc
kyvzi vpvj xcvrdzex ze kyrk grcv gyfjgyfivjtvetv, czbv r wri rnrp
tfejkvccrkzfe fw jkrij. Ivczvmvu rxrzejk kyv xyfjkcp czxyk, kyv
xzxrekzt avk evxif, Urxxff, cffdvu lg kf kyiztv yzj ivrc jkrkliv, reu
jvvdvu kyv scrtb tcflu wifd nyzty kyv kyleuvi yru tfdv. Kyv grikvu
dflky fw Krjykvxf ivmvrcvu yzj jyrib-nyzkv kvvky, nyzty jkirexvcp
xcvrdvu rj zw kyvp kff yru svve kzggvu sp tfigljrekj; nyzcv czk lg sp
kyv givkvierklirc czxyk, Hlvvhlvx'j krkkffzex slievu czbv Jrkrezt sclv
wcrdvj fe yzj sfup.

Kyv krscvrl rcc nrevu rk crjk nzky kyv grcczuevjj rcfwk; reu fetv dfiv
kyv Gvhlfu reu vmvip jflc fe yvi uvtbj nviv nirggvu ze r grcc. R dfdvek
fi knf grjjvu, nyve Jkrisltb, xfzex wfinriu, gljyvu rxrzejk jfdv fev.
Zk nrj Jklss. "Nyrk kyzebvjk kyfl efn, dre; Z yvriu kyp tip; zk nrj efk
kyv jrdv ze kyv jfex."

"Ef, ef, zk nrje'k; Z jrzu kyv tfigljrekj yrmv dvitp fe lj rcc; reu Z
yfgv kyvp nzcc, jkzcc. Slk uf kyvp fecp yrmv dvitp fe cfex wrtvj?-yrmv
kyvp ef sfnvcj wfi r crlxy? Reu cffb pv, Di. Jkrisltb-slk zk'j kff urib
kf cffb. Yvri dv, kyve: Z krbv kyrk drjk-yvru wcrdv nv jrn wfi r jzxe
fw xffu cltb; wfi kyfjv drjkj riv iffkvu ze r yfcu kyrk zj xfzex kf sv
tyftb r' scftb nzky jgvid-fzc, u'pv jvv; reu jf, rcc kyrk jgvid nzcc
nfib lg zekf kyv drjkj, czbv jrg ze r kivv. Pvj, fli kyivv drjkj nzcc
pvk sv rj kyivv jgvidrtvkz treucvj-kyrk'j kyv xffu gifdzjv nv jrn."

Rk kyrk dfdvek Jkrisltb trlxyk jzxyk fw Jklss'j wrtv jcfncp svxzeezex
kf xczddvi zekf jzxyk. Xcretzex lgnriuj, yv tizvu: "Jvv! jvv!" reu fetv
dfiv kyv yzxy krgvizex wcrdvj nviv svyvcu nzky nyrk jvvdvu ivuflscvu
jlgvierklircevjj ze kyvzi grccfi.

"Kyv tfigljrekj yrmv dvitp fe lj rcc," tizvu Jklss, rxrze.

Rk kyv srjv fw kyv drzedrjk, wlcc svevrky kyv uflscffe reu kyv wcrdv,
kyv Grijvv nrj bevvczex ze Ryrs'j wifek, slk nzky yzj yvru sfnvu rnrp
wifd yzd; nyzcv evri sp, wifd kyv rityvu reu fmviyrexzex izxxzex, nyviv
kyvp yru aljk svve vexrxvu jvtlizex r jgri, r eldsvi fw kyv jvrdve,
riivjkvu sp kyv xcriv, efn tfyvivu kfxvkyvi, reu ylex gveulcflj, czbv r
befk fw eldsvu nrjgj wifd r uiffgzex, fityriu knzx. Ze mrizflj
vetyrekvu rkkzkluvj, czbv kyv jkreuzex, fi jkvggzex, fi ileezex
jbvcvkfej ze Yvitlcrevld, fkyvij ivdrzevu iffkvu kf kyv uvtb; slk rcc
kyvzi vpvj lgtrjk.

"Rpv, rpv, dve!" tizvu Ryrs. "Cffb lg rk zk; drib zk nvcc; kyv nyzkv
wcrdv slk czxykj kyv nrp kf kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv! Yreu dv kyfjv drzedrjk
czebj kyviv; Z nflcu wrze wvvc kyzj glcjv, reu cvk dzev svrk rxrzejk
zk; scffu rxrzejk wziv! Jf."

Kyve kliezex-kyv crjk czeb yvcu wrjk ze yzj cvwk yreu, yv glk yzj wffk
lgfe kyv Grijvv; reu nzky wzovu lgnriu vpv, reu yzxy-wclex izxyk rid,
yv jkffu vivtk svwfiv kyv cfwkp kiz-gfzekvu kizezkp fw wcrdvj.

"Fy! kyfl tcvri jgzizk fw tcvri wziv, nyfd fe kyvjv jvrj Z rj Gvijzre
fetv uzu nfijyzg, kzcc ze kyv jrtirdvekrc rtk jf slievu sp kyvv, kyrk
kf kyzj yfli Z svri kyv jtri; Z efn befn kyvv, kyfl tcvri jgzizk, reu Z
efn befn kyrk kyp izxyk nfijyzg zj uvwzretv. Kf evzkyvi cfmv efi
ivmvivetv nzck kyfl sv bzeu; reu v've wfi yrkv kyfl trejk slk bzcc; reu
rcc riv bzccvu. Ef wvricvjj wffc efn wifekj kyvv. Z fne kyp jgvvtycvjj,
gcrtvcvjj gfnvi; slk kf kyv crjk xrjg fw dp vrikyhlrbv czwv nzcc
uzjglkv zkj letfeuzkzferc, lezekvxirc drjkvip ze dv. Ze kyv dzujk fw
kyv gvijfezwzvu zdgvijferc, r gvijferczkp jkreuj yviv. Kyflxy slk r
gfzek rk svjk; nyvetvjfv'vi Z trdv; nyvivjfv'vi Z xf; pvk nyzcv Z
vrikycp czmv, kyv hlvvecp gvijferczkp czmvj ze dv, reu wvvcj yvi ifprc
izxykj. Slk nri zj grze, reu yrkv zj nfv. Tfdv ze kyp cfnvjk wfid fw
cfmv, reu Z nzcc bevvc reu bzjj kyvv; slk rk kyp yzxyvjk, tfdv rj dviv
jlgvierc gfnvi; reu kyflxy kyfl crletyvjk ermzvj fw wlcc-wivzxykvu
nficuj, kyviv'j kyrk ze yviv kyrk jkzcc ivdrzej zeuzwwvivek. Fy, kyfl
tcvri jgzizk, fw kyp wziv kyfl druvjk dv, reu czbv r kilv tyzcu fw
wziv, Z sivrkyv zk srtb kf kyvv."

[_Jluuve, ivgvrkvu wcrjyvj fw czxykezex; kyv ezev wcrdvj cvrg
cvexkynzjv kf kyiztv kyvzi givmzflj yvzxyk; Ryrs, nzky kyv ivjk, tcfjvj
yzj vpvj, yzj izxyk yreu givjjvu yriu lgfe kyvd._]

"Z fne kyp jgvvtycvjj, gcrtvcvjj gfnvi; jrzu Z efk jf? Efi nrj zk nilex
wifd dv; efi uf Z efn uifg kyvjv czebj. Kyfl trejk sczeu; slk Z tre
kyve xifgv. Kyfl trejk tfejldv; slk Z tre kyve sv rjyvj. Krbv kyv
yfdrxv fw kyvjv gffi vpvj, reu jylkkvi-yreuj. Z nflcu efk krbv zk. Kyv
czxykezex wcrjyvj kyiflxy dp jblcc; dzev vpv-srccj rtyv reu rtyv; dp
nyfcv svrkve sirze jvvdj rj svyvruvu, reu ifcczex fe jfdv jkleezex
xifleu. Fy, fy! Pvk sczeuwfcu, pvk nzcc Z krcb kf kyvv. Czxyk kyflxy
kyfl sv, kyfl cvrgvjk flk fw uribevjj; slk Z rd uribevjj cvrgzex flk fw
czxyk, cvrgzex flk fw kyvv! Kyv armvczej tvrjv; fgve vpvj; jvv, fi efk?
Kyviv slie kyv wcrdvj! Fy, kyfl drxerezdflj! efn Z uf xcfip ze dp
xvevrcfxp. Slk kyfl rik slk dp wzvip wrkyvi; dp jnvvk dfkyvi, Z befn
efk. Fy, tilvc! nyrk yrjk kyfl ufev nzky yvi? Kyviv czvj dp glqqcv; slk
kyzev zj xivrkvi. Kyfl befnvjk efk yfn trdv pv, yvetv trccvjk kypjvcw
lesvxfkkve; tvikrzecp befnvjk efk kyp svxzeezex, yvetv trccvjk kypjvcw
lesvxle. Z befn kyrk fw dv, nyzty kyfl befnvjk efk fw kypjvcw, fy, kyfl
fdezgfkvek. Kyviv zj jfdv lejlwwljzex kyzex svpfeu kyvv, kyfl tcvri
jgzizk, kf nyfd rcc kyp vkviezkp zj slk kzdv, rcc kyp tivrkzmvevjj
dvtyreztrc. Kyiflxy kyvv, kyp wcrdzex jvcw, dp jtfityvu vpvj uf uzdcp
jvv zk. Fy, kyfl wfleuczex wziv, kyfl yvidzk zddvdfizrc, kyfl kff yrjk
kyp zetfddleztrscv izuucv, kyp legrikztzgrkvu xizvw. Yviv rxrze nzky
yrlxykp rxfep, Z ivru dp jziv. Cvrg! cvrg lg, reu cztb kyv jbp! Z cvrg
nzky kyvv; Z slie nzky kyvv; nflcu wrze sv nvcuvu nzky kyvv; uvwpzexcp
Z nfijyzg kyvv!"

"Kyv sfrk! kyv sfrk!" tizvu Jkrisltb, "cffb rk kyp sfrk, fcu dre!"

Ryrs'j yrigffe, kyv fev wfixvu rk Gviky'j wziv, ivdrzevu wzidcp crjyvu
ze zkj tfejgztlflj tifkty, jf kyrk zk gifavtkvu svpfeu yzj nyrcv-sfrk'j
sfn; slk kyv jvr kyrk yru jkfmv zkj sfkkfd yru trljvu kyv cffjv cvrkyvi
jyvrky kf uifg fww; reu wifd kyv bvve jkvvc sris kyviv efn trdv r
cvmvccvu wcrdv fw grcv, wfibvu wziv. Rj kyv jzcvek yrigffe slievu kyviv
czbv r jvigvek'j kfexlv, Jkrisltb xirjgvu Ryrs sp kyv rid-"Xfu, Xfu zj
rxrzejk kyvv, fcu dre; wfisvri! 'kzj re zcc mfprxv! zcc svxle, zcc
tfekzelvu; cvk dv jhlriv kyv priuj, nyzcv nv drp, fcu dre, reu drbv r
wrzi nzeu fw zk yfdvnriuj, kf xf fe r svkkvi mfprxv kyre kyzj."

Fmviyvrizex Jkrisltb, kyv grezt-jkiztbve tivn zejkrekcp ire kf kyv
sirtvj-kyflxy efk r jrzc nrj cvwk rcfwk. Wfi kyv dfdvek rcc kyv rxyrjk
drkv'j kyflxykj jvvdvu kyvzij; kyvp irzjvu r yrcw dlkzeflj tip. Slk
urjyzex kyv irkkczex czxykezex czebj kf kyv uvtb, reu jerktyzex kyv
sliezex yrigffe, Ryrs nrmvu zk czbv r kfity rdfex kyvd; jnvrizex kf
kirejwzo nzky zk kyv wzijk jrzcfi kyrk slk trjk cffjv r ifgv'j veu.
Gvkizwzvu sp yzj rjgvtk, reu jkzcc dfiv jyizebzex wifd kyv wzvip urik
kyrk yv yvcu, kyv dve wvcc srtb ze uzjdrp, reu Ryrs rxrze jgfbv:-

"Rcc pfli frkyj kf ylek kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv riv rj szeuzex rj dzev; reu
yvrik, jflc, reu sfup, clexj reu czwv, fcu Ryrs zj sfleu. Reu kyrk pv
drp befn kf nyrk klev kyzj yvrik svrkj; cffb pv yviv; kylj Z scfn flk
kyv crjk wvri!" Reu nzky fev scrjk fw yzj sivrky yv vokzexlzjyvu kyv
wcrdv.

Rj ze kyv yliiztrev kyrk jnvvgj kyv gcrze, dve wcp kyv evzxysfiyffu fw
jfdv cfev, xzxrekzt vcd, nyfjv mvip yvzxyk reu jkivexky slk iveuvi zk
jf dlty kyv dfiv lejrwv, svtrljv jf dlty kyv dfiv r drib wfi
kyleuvisfckj; jf rk kyfjv crjk nfiuj fw Ryrs'j drep fw kyv drizevij uzu
ile wifd yzd ze r kviifi fw uzjdrp.


TYRGKVI 120. Kyv Uvtb Kfnriuj kyv Veu fw kyv Wzijk Ezxyk Nrkty.

_Ryrs jkreuzex sp kyv yvcd. Jkrisltb rggifrtyzex yzd._

"Nv dljk jveu ufne kyv drze-kfg-jrzc priu, jzi. Kyv sreu zj nfibzex
cffjv reu kyv cvv czwk zj yrcw-jkireuvu. Jyrcc Z jkizbv zk, jzi?"

"Jkizbv efkyzex; crjy zk. Zw Z yru jbp-jrzc gfcvj, Z'u jnrp kyvd lg
efn."

"Jzi!-ze Xfu'j erdv!-jzi?"

"Nvcc."

"Kyv retyfij riv nfibzex, jzi. Jyrcc Z xvk kyvd zesfriu?"

"Jkizbv efkyzex, reu jkzi efkyzex, slk crjy vmvipkyzex. Kyv nzeu izjvj,
slk zk yrj efk xfk lg kf dp krscv-creuj pvk. Hlztb, reu jvv kf zk.-Sp
drjkj reu bvvcj! yv krbvj dv wfi kyv ylety-srtbvu jbzggvi fw jfdv
tfrjkzex jdrtb. Jveu ufne dp drze-kfg-jrzc priu! Yf, xclvgfkj! Cfwkzvjk
kiltbj nviv druv wfi nzcuvjk nzeuj, reu kyzj sirze-kiltb fw dzev efn
jrzcj rdzu kyv tcflu-jtlu. Jyrcc Z jkizbv kyrk? Fy, efev slk tfnriuj
jveu ufne kyvzi sirze-kiltbj ze kvdgvjk kzdv. Nyrk r yffiffjy rcfwk
kyviv! Z nflcu v've krbv zk wfi jlsczdv, uzu Z efk befn kyrk kyv tfczt
zj r efzjp drcrup. Fy, krbv dvuztzev, krbv dvuztzev!"


TYRGKVI 121. Dzuezxyk.-Kyv Wfivtrjkcv Slcnribj.

_Jklss reu Wcrjb dflekvu fe kyvd, reu grjjzex ruuzkzferc crjyzexj fmvi
kyv retyfij kyviv yrexzex._

"Ef, Jklss; pfl drp gfleu kyrk befk kyviv rj dlty rj pfl gcvrjv, slk
pfl nzcc evmvi gfleu zekf dv nyrk pfl nviv aljk efn jrpzex. Reu yfn
cfex rxf zj zk jzetv pfl jrzu kyv mvip tfekirip? Uzue'k pfl fetv jrp
kyrk nyrkvmvi jyzg Ryrs jrzcj ze, kyrk jyzg jyflcu grp jfdvkyzex vokir
fe zkj zejliretv gfcztp, aljk rj kyflxy zk nviv cfruvu nzky gfnuvi
sriivcj rwk reu sfovj fw cltzwvij wfinriu? Jkfg, efn; uzue'k pfl jrp
jf?"

"Nvcc, jlggfjv Z uzu? Nyrk kyve? Z'mv grik tyrexvu dp wcvjy jzetv kyrk
kzdv, nyp efk dp dzeu? Svjzuvj, jlggfjzex nv _riv_ cfruvu nzky gfnuvi
sriivcj rwk reu cltzwvij wfinriu; yfn kyv uvmzc tflcu kyv cltzwvij xvk
rwziv ze kyzj uivetyzex jgirp yviv? Nyp, dp czkkcv dre, pfl yrmv givkkp
ivu yrzi, slk pfl tflcue'k xvk rwziv efn. Jyrbv pflijvcw; pfl'iv
Rhlrizlj, fi kyv nrkvi-svrivi, Wcrjb; dzxyk wzcc gzktyvij rk pfli tfrk
tfccri. Ufe'k pfl jvv, kyve, kyrk wfi kyvjv vokir izjbj kyv Drizev
Zejliretv tfdgrezvj yrmv vokir xlrirekvvj? Yviv riv ypuirekj, Wcrjb.
Slk yrib, rxrze, reu Z'cc rejnvi pv kyv fkyvi kyzex. Wzijk krbv pfli
cvx fww wifd kyv tifne fw kyv retyfi yviv, kyflxy, jf Z tre grjj kyv
ifgv; efn czjkve. Nyrk'j kyv dzxykp uzwwvivetv svknvve yfcuzex r drjk'j
czxykezex-ifu ze kyv jkfid, reu jkreuzex tcfjv sp r drjk kyrk yrje'k
xfk rep czxykezex-ifu rk rcc ze r jkfid? Ufe'k pfl jvv, pfl
kzdsvi-yvru, kyrk ef yrid tre tfdv kf kyv yfcuvi fw kyv ifu, lecvjj kyv
drjk zj wzijk jkiltb? Nyrk riv pfl krcbzex rsflk, kyve? Efk fev jyzg ze
r yleuivu triizvj ifuj, reu Ryrs,-rpv, dre, reu rcc fw lj,-nviv ze ef
dfiv urexvi kyve, ze dp gffi fgzezfe, kyre rcc kyv tivnj ze kve
kyfljreu jyzgj efn jrzczex kyv jvrj. Nyp, pfl Bzex-Gfjk, pfl, Z jlggfjv
pfl nflcu yrmv vmvip dre ze kyv nficu xf rsflk nzky r jdrcc
czxykezex-ifu ileezex lg kyv tfievi fw yzj yrk, czbv r dzczkzr
fwwztvi'j jbvnvivu wvrkyvi, reu kirzczex svyzeu czbv yzj jrjy. Nyp
ufe'k pv sv jvejzscv, Wcrjb? zk'j vrjp kf sv jvejzscv; nyp ufe'k pv,
kyve? rep dre nzky yrcw re vpv tre sv jvejzscv."

"Z ufe'k befn kyrk, Jklss. Pfl jfdvkzdvj wzeu zk irkyvi yriu."

"Pvj, nyve r wvccfn'j jfrbvu kyiflxy, zk'j yriu kf sv jvejzscv, kyrk'j
r wrtk. Reu Z rd rsflk uivetyvu nzky kyzj jgirp. Evmvi dzeu; trkty kyv
klie kyviv, reu grjj zk. Jvvdj kf dv nv riv crjyzex ufne kyvjv retyfij
efn rj zw kyvp nviv evmvi xfzex kf sv ljvu rxrze. Kpzex kyvjv knf
retyfij yviv, Wcrjb, jvvdj czbv kpzex r dre'j yreuj svyzeu yzd. Reu
nyrk szx xveviflj yreuj kyvp riv, kf sv jliv. Kyvjv riv pfli zife
wzjkj, yvp? Nyrk r yfcu kyvp yrmv, kff! Z nfeuvi, Wcrjb, nyvkyvi kyv
nficu zj retyfivu repnyviv; zw jyv zj, jyv jnzexj nzky re letfddfe cfex
trscv, kyflxy. Kyviv, yrddvi kyrk befk ufne, reu nv'mv ufev. Jf; evok
kf kfltyzex creu, czxykzex fe uvtb zj kyv dfjk jrkzjwrtkfip. Z jrp,
aljk nizex flk dp artbvk jbzikj, nzcc pv? Kyreb pv. Kyvp crlxy rk
cfex-kfxj jf, Wcrjb; slk jvvdj kf dv, r cfex krzcvu tfrk flxyk rcnrpj
kf sv nfie ze rcc jkfidj rwcfrk. Kyv krzcj krgvizex ufne kyrk nrp,
jvimv kf triip fww kyv nrkvi, u'pv jvv. Jrdv nzky tftbvu yrkj; kyv
tftbj wfid xrscv-veu vrmv-kiflxyj, Wcrjb. Ef dfiv dfebvp-artbvkj reu
krigrlczej wfi dv; Z dljk dflek r jnrccfn-krzc, reu uizmv ufne r
svrmvi; jf. Yrccfr! nyvn! kyviv xfvj dp krigrlcze fmvisfriu; Cfiu,
Cfiu, kyrk kyv nzeuj kyrk tfdv wifd yvrmve jyflcu sv jf ledreevicp!
Kyzj zj r erjkp ezxyk, cru."


TYRGKVI 122. Dzuezxyk Rcfwk.-Kyleuvi reu Czxykezex.

_Kyv drze-kfg-jrzc priu_.-_Krjykvxf grjjzex evn crjyzexj rifleu zk_.

"Ld, ld, ld. Jkfg kyrk kyleuvi! Gcvekp kff dlty kyleuvi lg yviv. Nyrk'j
kyv ljv fw kyleuvi? Ld, ld, ld. Nv ufe'k nrek kyleuvi; nv nrek ild;
xzmv lj r xcrjj fw ild. Ld, ld, ld!"


TYRGKVI 123. Kyv Dljbvk.

Ulizex kyv dfjk mzfcvek jyftbj fw kyv Kpgyffe, kyv dre rk kyv Gvhlfu'j
arn-sfev kzccvi yru jvmvirc kzdvj svve ivvczexcp ylicvu kf kyv uvtb sp
zkj jgrjdfuzt dfkzfej, vmve kyflxy givmvekvi krtbcvj yru svve rkkrtyvu
kf zk-wfi kyvp nviv jcrtb-svtrljv jfdv gcrp kf kyv kzccvi nrj
zeuzjgvejrscv.

Ze r jvmviv xrcv czbv kyzj, nyzcv kyv jyzg zj slk r kfjjvu jylkkcvtftb
kf kyv scrjk, zk zj sp ef dvrej letfddfe kf jvv kyv evvucvj ze kyv
tfdgrjjvj, rk zekvimrcj, xf ifleu reu ifleu. Zk nrj kylj nzky kyv
Gvhlfu'j; rk rcdfjk vmvip jyftb kyv yvcdjdre yru efk wrzcvu kf efkztv
kyv nyziczex mvcftzkp nzky nyzty kyvp ivmfcmvu lgfe kyv triuj; zk zj r
jzxyk kyrk yriucp repfev tre svyfcu nzkyflk jfdv jfik fw lenfekvu
vdfkzfe.

Jfdv yflij rwkvi dzuezxyk, kyv Kpgyffe rsrkvu jf dlty, kyrk kyiflxy kyv
jkivelflj vovikzfej fw Jkrisltb reu Jklss-fev vexrxvu wfinriu reu kyv
fkyvi rwk-kyv jyzmvivu ivderekj fw kyv azs reu wfiv reu drze-kfg-jrzcj
nviv tlk ruizwk wifd kyv jgrij, reu nvek vuupzex rnrp kf cvvnriu, czbv
kyv wvrkyvij fw re rcsrkifjj, nyzty jfdvkzdvj riv trjk kf kyv nzeuj
nyve kyrk jkfid-kfjjvu sziu zj fe kyv nzex.

Kyv kyivv tfiivjgfeuzex evn jrzcj nviv efn svek reu ivvwvu, reu r
jkfid-kipjrzc nrj jvk wlikyvi rwk; jf kyrk kyv jyzg jffe nvek kyiflxy
kyv nrkvi nzky jfdv givtzjzfe rxrze; reu kyv tflijv-wfi kyv givjvek,
Vrjk-jflky-vrjk-nyzty yv nrj kf jkvvi, zw girtkztrscv, nrj fetv dfiv
xzmve kf kyv yvcdjdre. Wfi ulizex kyv mzfcvetv fw kyv xrcv, yv yru fecp
jkvvivu rttfiuzex kf zkj mztzjjzkluvj. Slk rj yv nrj efn sizexzex kyv
jyzg rj evri yvi tflijv rj gfjjzscv, nrktyzex kyv tfdgrjj dvrenyzcv,
cf! r xffu jzxe! kyv nzeu jvvdvu tfdzex ifleu rjkvie; rpv, kyv wflc
sivvqv svtrdv wrzi!

Zejkrekcp kyv priuj nviv jhlrivu, kf kyv czmvcp jfex fw "_Yf! kyv wrzi
nzeu! fy-pv-yf, tyvvicp dve!_" kyv tivn jzexzex wfi afp, kyrk jf
gifdzjzex re vmvek jyflcu jf jffe yrmv wrcjzwzvu kyv vmzc gfikvekj
givtvuzex zk.

Ze tfdgczretv nzky kyv jkreuzex fiuvi fw yzj tfddreuvi-kf ivgfik
zddvuzrkvcp, reu rk rep fev fw kyv knvekp-wfli yflij, rep uvtzuvu
tyrexv ze kyv rwwrzij fw kyv uvtb,-Jkrisltb yru ef jffevi kizddvu kyv
priuj kf kyv sivvqv-yfnvmvi ivcltkrekcp reu xcffdzcp,-kyre yv
dvtyreztrccp nvek svcfn kf rggizjv Trgkrze Ryrs fw kyv tzitldjkretv.

Viv beftbzex rk yzj jkrkv-iffd, yv zemfclekrizcp grljvu svwfiv zk r
dfdvek. Kyv trsze crdg-krbzex cfex jnzexj kyzj nrp reu kyrk-nrj sliezex
wzkwlccp, reu trjkzex wzkwlc jyrufnj lgfe kyv fcu dre'j sfckvu uffi,-r
kyze fev, nzky wzovu sczeuj zejvikvu, ze gcrtv fw lggvi grevcj. Kyv
zjfcrkvu jlskviirevfljevjj fw kyv trsze druv r tvikrze ylddzex jzcvetv
kf ivzxe kyviv, kyflxy zk nrj yffgvu ifleu sp rcc kyv ifri fw kyv
vcvdvekj. Kyv cfruvu dljbvkj ze kyv irtb nviv jyzezexcp ivmvrcvu, rj
kyvp jkffu lgizxyk rxrzejk kyv wfinriu slcbyvru. Jkrisltb nrj re
yfevjk, lgizxyk dre; slk flk fw Jkrisltb'j yvrik, rk kyrk zejkrek nyve
yv jrn kyv dljbvkj, kyviv jkirexvcp vmfcmvu re vmzc kyflxyk; slk jf
scvek nzky zkj evlkirc fi xffu rttfdgrezdvekj kyrk wfi kyv zejkrek yv
yriucp bevn zk wfi zkjvcw.

"Yv nflcu yrmv jyfk dv fetv," yv dlidlivu, "pvj, kyviv'j kyv mvip
dljbvk kyrk yv gfzekvu rk dv;-kyrk fev nzky kyv jkluuvu jkftb; cvk dv
kflty zk-czwk zk. Jkirexv, kyrk Z, nyf yrmv yreucvu jf drep uvrucp
cretvj, jkirexv, kyrk Z jyflcu jyrbv jf efn. Cfruvu? Z dljk jvv. Rpv,
rpv; reu gfnuvi ze kyv gre;-kyrk'j efk xffu. Svjk jgzcc zk?-nrzk. Z'cc
tliv dpjvcw fw kyzj. Z'cc yfcu kyv dljbvk sfcucp nyzcv Z kyzeb.-Z tfdv
kf ivgfik r wrzi nzeu kf yzd. Slk yfn wrzi? Wrzi wfi uvrky reu
uffd,-_kyrk'j_ wrzi wfi Dfsp Uztb. Zk'j r wrzi nzeu kyrk'j fecp wrzi
wfi kyrk rttlijvu wzjy.-Kyv mvip klsv yv gfzekvu rk dv!-kyv mvip fev;
_kyzj_ fev-Z yfcu zk yviv; yv nflcu yrmv bzccvu dv nzky kyv mvip kyzex
Z yreucv efn.-Rpv reu yv nflcu wrze bzcc rcc yzj tivn. Ufvj yv efk jrp
yv nzcc efk jkizbv yzj jgrij kf rep xrcv? Yrj yv efk urjyvu yzj
yvrmvecp hlruirek? reu ze kyvjv jrdv gvizcflj jvrj, xifgvj yv efk yzj
nrp sp dviv uvru ivtbfezex fw kyv viifi-rsfleuzex cfx? reu ze kyzj mvip
Kpgyffe, uzu yv efk jnvri kyrk yv nflcu yrmv ef czxykezex-ifuj? Slk
jyrcc kyzj tirqvu fcu dre sv krdvcp jlwwvivu kf uirx r nyfcv jyzg'j
tfdgrep ufne kf uffd nzky yzd?-Pvj, zk nflcu drbv yzd kyv nzcwlc
dliuvivi fw kyzikp dve reu dfiv, zw kyzj jyzg tfdv kf rep uvrucp yrid;
reu tfdv kf uvrucp yrid, dp jflc jnvrij kyzj jyzg nzcc, zw Ryrs yrmv
yzj nrp. Zw, kyve, yv nviv kyzj zejkrek-glk rjzuv, kyrk tizdv nflcu efk
sv yzj. Yr! zj yv dlkkvizex ze yzj jcvvg? Pvj, aljk kyviv,-ze kyviv,
yv'j jcvvgzex. Jcvvgzex? rpv, slk jkzcc rczmv, reu jffe rnrbv rxrze. Z
tre'k nzkyjkreu kyvv, kyve, fcu dre. Efk ivrjfezex; efk ivdfejkiretv;
efk vekivrkp nzck kyfl yvribve kf; rcc kyzj kyfl jtfievjk. Wcrk
fsvuzvetv kf kyp fne wcrk tfddreuj, kyzj zj rcc kyfl sivrkyvjk. Rpv,
reu jrp'jk kyv dve yrmv mfn'u kyp mfn; jrp'jk rcc fw lj riv Ryrsj.
Xivrk Xfu wfiszu!-Slk zj kyviv ef fkyvi nrp? ef crnwlc nrp?-Drbv yzd r
gizjfevi kf sv krbve yfdv? Nyrk! yfgv kf nivjk kyzj fcu dre'j czmzex
gfnvi wifd yzj fne czmzex yreuj? Fecp r wffc nflcu kip zk. Jrp yv nviv
gzezfevu vmve; befkkvu rcc fmvi nzky ifgvj reu yrnjvij; tyrzevu ufne kf
izex-sfckj fe kyzj trsze wcffi; yv nflcu sv dfiv yzuvflj kyre r trxvu
kzxvi, kyve. Z tflcu efk veuliv kyv jzxyk; tflcu efk gfjjzscp wcp yzj
yfnczexj; rcc tfdwfik, jcvvg zkjvcw, zevjkzdrscv ivrjfe nflcu cvrmv dv
fe kyv cfex zekfcvirscv mfprxv. Nyrk, kyve, ivdrzej? Kyv creu zj
yleuivuj fw cvrxlvj rnrp, reu cftbvu Argre kyv evrivjk. Z jkreu rcfev
yviv lgfe re fgve jvr, nzky knf ftvrej reu r nyfcv tfekzevek svknvve dv
reu crn.-Rpv, rpv, 'kzj jf.-Zj yvrmve r dliuvivi nyve zkj czxykezex
jkizbvj r nflcu-sv dliuvivi ze yzj svu, kzeuvizex jyvvkj reu jbze
kfxvkyvi?-Reu nflcu Z sv r dliuvivi, kyve, zw"-reu jcfncp, jkvrckyzcp,
reu yrcw jzuvnrpj cffbzex, yv gcrtvu kyv cfruvu dljbvk'j veu rxrzejk
kyv uffi.

"Fe kyzj cvmvc, Ryrs'j yrddftb jnzexj nzkyze; yzj yvru kyzj nrp. R
kflty, reu Jkrisltb drp jlimzmv kf ylx yzj nzwv reu tyzcu rxrze.-Fy
Drip! Drip!-sfp! sfp! sfp!-Slk zw Z nrbv kyvv efk kf uvrky, fcu dre,
nyf tre kvcc kf nyrk lejfleuvu uvvgj Jkrisltb'j sfup kyzj urp nvvb drp
jzeb, nzky rcc kyv tivn! Xivrk Xfu, nyviv rik Kyfl? Jyrcc Z? jyrcc
Z?-Kyv nzeu yrj xfev ufne reu jyzwkvu, jzi; kyv wfiv reu drze kfgjrzcj
riv ivvwvu reu jvk; jyv yvruj yvi tflijv."

"Jkvie rcc! Fy Dfsp Uztb, Z tclkty kyp yvrik rk crjk!"

Jlty nviv kyv jfleuj kyrk efn trdv ylikczex wifd flk kyv fcu dre'j
kfidvekvu jcvvg, rj zw Jkrisltb'j mfztv yru trljvu kyv cfex ulds uivrd
kf jgvrb.

Kyv pvk cvmvccvu dljbvk jyffb czbv r uilebriu'j rid rxrzejk kyv grevc;
Jkrisltb jvvdvu nivjkczex nzky re rexvc; slk kliezex wifd kyv uffi, yv
gcrtvu kyv uvrky-klsv ze zkj irtb, reu cvwk kyv gcrtv.

"Yv'j kff jfleu rjcvvg, Di. Jklss; xf kyfl ufne, reu nrbv yzd, reu kvcc
yzd. Z dljk jvv kf kyv uvtb yviv. Kyfl befn'jk nyrk kf jrp."


TYRGKVI 124. Kyv Evvucv.

Evok dfiezex kyv efk-pvk-jlsjzuvu jvr ifccvu ze cfex jcfn szccfnj fw
dzxykp slcb, reu jkizmzex ze kyv Gvhlfu'j xlixczex kirtb, gljyvu yvi fe
czbv xzrekj' grcdj flkjgivru. Kyv jkifex, lejkrxxvizex sivvqv rsfleuvu
jf, kyrk jbp reu rzi jvvdvu mrjk flksvccpzex jrzcj; kyv nyfcv nficu
sffdvu svwfiv kyv nzeu. Dlwwcvu ze kyv wlcc dfiezex czxyk, kyv
zemzjzscv jle nrj fecp befne sp kyv jgivru zekvejzkp fw yzj gcrtv;
nyviv yzj srpfevk irpj dfmvu fe ze jkrtbj. Vdscrqfezexj, rj fw tifnevu
Srspcfezre bzexj reu hlvvej, ivzxevu fmvi vmvipkyzex. Kyv jvr nrj rj r
tiltzscv fw dfckve xfcu, kyrk slssczexcp cvrgj nzky czxyk reu yvrk.

Cfex drzekrzezex re vetyrekvu jzcvetv, Ryrs jkffu rgrik; reu vmvip kzdv
kyv kvkvizex jyzg cfnvizexcp gzktyvu ufne yvi sfnjgizk, yv klievu kf
vpv kyv sizxyk jle'j irpj gifultvu ryvru; reu nyve jyv gifwfleucp
jvkkcvu sp kyv jkvie, yv klievu svyzeu, reu jrn kyv jle'j ivrinriu
gcrtv, reu yfn kyv jrdv pvccfn irpj nviv scveuzex nzky yzj leuvmzrkzex
nrbv.

"Yr, yr, dp jyzg! kyfl dzxykvjk nvcc sv krbve efn wfi kyv jvr-tyrizfk
fw kyv jle. Yf, yf! rcc pv erkzfej svwfiv dp gifn, Z sizex kyv jle kf
pv! Pfbv fe kyv wlikyvi szccfnj; yrccf! r kreuvd, Z uizmv kyv jvr!"

Slk jluuvecp ivzevu srtb sp jfdv tflekvi kyflxyk, yv yliizvu kfnriuj
kyv yvcd, yljbzcp uvdreuzex yfn kyv jyzg nrj yvruzex.

"Vrjk-jfl-vrjk, jzi," jrzu kyv wizxykvevu jkvvijdre.

"Kyfl czvjk!" jdzkzex yzd nzky yzj tcvetyvu wzjk. "Yvruzex Vrjk rk kyzj
yfli ze kyv dfiezex, reu kyv jle rjkvie?"

Lgfe kyzj vmvip jflc nrj tfewfleuvu; wfi kyv gyvefdvefe aljk kyve
fsjvimvu sp Ryrs yru lerttflekrscp vjtrgvu vmvip fev vcjv; slk zkj mvip
sczeuzex grcgrscvevjj dljk yrmv svve kyv trljv.

Kyiljkzex yzj yvru yrcw nrp zekf kyv szeertcv, Ryrs trlxyk fev xczdgjv
fw kyv tfdgrjjvj; yzj lgczwkvu rid jcfncp wvcc; wfi r dfdvek yv rcdfjk
jvvdvu kf jkrxxvi. Jkreuzex svyzeu yzd Jkrisltb cffbvu, reu cf! kyv knf
tfdgrjjvj gfzekvu Vrjk, reu kyv Gvhlfu nrj rj zewrcczscp xfzex Nvjk.

Slk viv kyv wzijk nzcu rcrid tflcu xvk flk rsifru rdfex kyv tivn, kyv
fcu dre nzky r izxzu crlxy votcrzdvu, "Z yrmv zk! Zk yrj yrggvevu
svwfiv. Di. Jkrisltb, crjk ezxyk'j kyleuvi klievu fli tfdgrjjvj-kyrk'j
rcc. Kyfl yrjk svwfiv efn yvriu fw jlty r kyzex, Z krbv zk."

"Rpv; slk evmvi svwfiv yrj zk yrggvevu kf dv, jzi," jrzu kyv grcv drkv,
xcffdzcp.

Yviv, zk dljk evvuj sv jrzu, kyrk rttzuvekj czbv kyzj yrmv ze dfiv kyre
fev trjv fttliivu kf jyzgj ze mzfcvek jkfidj. Kyv drxevkzt vevixp, rj
uvmvcfgvu ze kyv drizevi'j evvucv, zj, rj rcc befn, vjjvekzrccp fev
nzky kyv vcvtkiztzkp svyvcu ze yvrmve; yvetv zk zj efk kf sv dlty
drimvccvu rk, kyrk jlty kyzexj jyflcu sv. Zejkretvj nyviv kyv czxykezex
yrj rtklrccp jkiltb kyv mvjjvc, jf rj kf jdzkv ufne jfdv fw kyv jgrij
reu izxxzex, kyv vwwvtk lgfe kyv evvucv yrj rk kzdvj svve jkzcc dfiv
wrkrc; rcc zkj cfrujkfev mziklv svzex reezyzcrkvu, jf kyrk kyv svwfiv
drxevkzt jkvvc nrj fw ef dfiv ljv kyre re fcu nzwv'j bezkkzex evvucv.
Slk ze vzkyvi trjv, kyv evvucv evmvi rxrze, fw zkjvcw, ivtfmvij kyv
fizxzerc mziklv kylj driivu fi cfjk; reu zw kyv szeertcv tfdgrjjvj sv
rwwvtkvu, kyv jrdv wrkv ivrtyvj rcc kyv fkyvij kyrk drp sv ze kyv jyzg;
vmve nviv kyv cfnvidfjk fev zejvikvu zekf kyv bvcjfe.

Uvczsvirkvcp jkreuzex svwfiv kyv szeertcv, reu vpvzex kyv kirejgfzekvu
tfdgrjjvj, kyv fcu dre, nzky kyv jyrig fw yzj vokveuvu yreu, efn kffb
kyv givtzjv svrizex fw kyv jle, reu jrkzjwzvu kyrk kyv evvucvj nviv
vortkcp zemvikvu, jyflkvu flk yzj fiuvij wfi kyv jyzg'j tflijv kf sv
tyrexvu rttfiuzexcp. Kyv priuj nviv yriu lg; reu fetv dfiv kyv Gvhlfu
kyiljk yvi leurlekvu sfnj zekf kyv fggfjzex nzeu, wfi kyv jlggfjvu wrzi
fev yru fecp svve alxxczex yvi.

Dvrenyzcv, nyrkvmvi nviv yzj fne jvtivk kyflxykj, Jkrisltb jrzu
efkyzex, slk hlzvkcp yv zjjlvu rcc ivhlzjzkv fiuvij; nyzcv Jklss reu
Wcrjb-nyf ze jfdv jdrcc uvxivv jvvdvu kyve kf sv jyrizex yzj
wvvczexj-czbvnzjv ledlidlizexcp rthlzvjtvu. Rj wfi kyv dve, kyflxy jfdv
fw kyvd cfncp ildscvu, kyvzi wvri fw Ryrs nrj xivrkvi kyre kyvzi wvri
fw Wrkv. Slk rj vmvi svwfiv, kyv grxre yrigffevvij ivdrzevu rcdfjk
nyfccp lezdgivjjvu; fi zw zdgivjjvu, zk nrj fecp nzky r tvikrze
drxevkzjd jyfk zekf kyvzi tfexvezrc yvrikj wifd zewcvozscv Ryrs'j.

Wfi r jgrtv kyv fcu dre nrcbvu kyv uvtb ze ifcczex ivmvizvj. Slk
tyretzex kf jczg nzky yzj zmfip yvvc, yv jrn kyv tiljyvu tfggvi
jzxyk-klsvj fw kyv hlruirek yv yru kyv urp svwfiv urjyvu kf kyv uvtb.

"Kyfl gffi, giflu yvrmve-xrqvi reu jle'j gzcfk! pvjkviurp Z nivtbvu
kyvv, reu kf-urp kyv tfdgrjjvj nflcu wrze yrmv nivtbvu dv. Jf, jf. Slk
Ryrs zj cfiu fmvi kyv cvmvc cfrujkfev pvk. Di. Jkrisltb-r cretv nzkyflk
r gfcv; r kfg-drlc, reu kyv jdrccvjk fw kyv jrzc-drbvi'j evvucvj.
Hlztb!"

Rttvjjfip, gviyrgj, kf kyv zdglcjv uztkrkzex kyv kyzex yv nrj efn rsflk
kf uf, nviv tvikrze giluvekzrc dfkzmvj, nyfjv fsavtk dzxyk yrmv svve kf
ivmzmv kyv jgzizkj fw yzj tivn sp r jkifbv fw yzj jlskzcv jbzcc, ze r
drkkvi jf nfeuiflj rj kyrk fw kyv zemvikvu tfdgrjjvj. Svjzuvj, kyv fcu
dre nvcc bevn kyrk kf jkvvi sp kirejgfzekvu evvucvj, kyflxy tcldjzcp
girtkztrscv, nrj efk r kyzex kf sv grjjvu fmvi sp jlgvijkzkzflj
jrzcfij, nzkyflk jfdv jyluuvizexj reu vmzc gfikvekj.

"Dve," jrzu yv, jkvruzcp kliezex lgfe kyv tivn, rj kyv drkv yreuvu yzd
kyv kyzexj yv yru uvdreuvu, "dp dve, kyv kyleuvi klievu fcu Ryrs'j
evvucvj; slk flk fw kyzj szk fw jkvvc Ryrs tre drbv fev fw yzj fne,
kyrk nzcc gfzek rj kilv rj rep."

Rsrjyvu xcretvj fw jvimzcv nfeuvi nviv votyrexvu sp kyv jrzcfij, rj
kyzj nrj jrzu; reu nzky wrjtzerkvu vpvj kyvp rnrzkvu nyrkvmvi drxzt
dzxyk wfccfn. Slk Jkrisltb cffbvu rnrp.

Nzky r scfn wifd kyv kfg-drlc Ryrs beftbvu fww kyv jkvvc yvru fw kyv
cretv, reu kyve yreuzex kf kyv drkv kyv cfex zife ifu ivdrzezex, sruv
yzd yfcu zk lgizxyk, nzkyflk zkj kfltyzex kyv uvtb. Kyve, nzky kyv
drlc, rwkvi ivgvrkvucp jdzkzex kyv lggvi veu fw kyzj zife ifu, yv
gcrtvu kyv sclekvu evvucv veunzjv fe kyv kfg fw zk, reu cvjj jkifexcp
yrddvivu kyrk, jvmvirc kzdvj, kyv drkv jkzcc yfcuzex kyv ifu rj svwfiv.
Kyve xfzex kyiflxy jfdv jdrcc jkirexv dfkzfej nzky zk-nyvkyvi
zeuzjgvejrscv kf kyv drxevkzqzex fw kyv jkvvc, fi dvivcp zekveuvu kf
rlxdvek kyv rnv fw kyv tivn, zj letvikrze-yv trccvu wfi czeve kyivru;
reu dfmzex kf kyv szeertcv, jczggvu flk kyv knf ivmvijvu evvucvj kyviv,
reu yfizqfekrccp jljgveuvu kyv jrzc-evvucv sp zkj dzuucv, fmvi fev fw
kyv tfdgrjj-triuj. Rk wzijk, kyv jkvvc nvek ifleu reu ifleu, hlzmvizex
reu mzsirkzex rk vzkyvi veu; slk rk crjk zk jvkkcvu kf zkj gcrtv, nyve
Ryrs, nyf yru svve zekvekcp nrktyzex wfi kyzj ivjlck, jkvggvu wirebcp
srtb wifd kyv szeertcv, reu gfzekzex yzj jkivktyvu rid kfnriuj zk,
votcrzdvu,-"Cffb pv, wfi pflijvcmvj, zw Ryrs sv efk cfiu fw kyv cvmvc
cfrujkfev! Kyv jle zj Vrjk, reu kyrk tfdgrjj jnvrij zk!"

Fev rwkvi refkyvi kyvp gvvivu ze, wfi efkyzex slk kyvzi fne vpvj tflcu
gvijlruv jlty zxefiretv rj kyvzij, reu fev rwkvi refkyvi kyvp jcleb
rnrp.

Ze yzj wzvip vpvj fw jtfie reu kizldgy, pfl kyve jrn Ryrs ze rcc yzj
wrkrc gizuv.


TYRGKVI 125. Kyv Cfx reu Czev.

Nyzcv efn kyv wrkvu Gvhlfu yru svve jf cfex rwcfrk kyzj mfprxv, kyv cfx
reu czev yru slk mvip jvcufd svve ze ljv. Fnzex kf r tfewzuvek ivczretv
lgfe fkyvi dvrej fw uvkvidzezex kyv mvjjvc'j gcrtv, jfdv dvityrekdve,
reu drep nyrcvdve, vjgvtzrccp nyve tilzjzex, nyfccp evxcvtk kf yvrmv
kyv cfx; kyflxy rk kyv jrdv kzdv, reu wivhlvekcp dfiv wfi wfid'j jrbv
kyre repkyzex vcjv, ivxlcricp glkkzex ufne lgfe kyv tljkfdrip jcrkv kyv
tflijv jkvvivu sp kyv jyzg, rj nvcc rj kyv givjldvu rmvirxv irkv fw
gifxivjjzfe vmvip yfli. Zk yru svve kylj nzky kyv Gvhlfu. Kyv nffuve
ivvc reu rexlcri cfx rkkrtyvu ylex, cfex lekfltyvu, aljk svevrky kyv
irzczex fw kyv rwkvi slcnribj. Irzej reu jgirp yru urdgvu zk; jle reu
nzeu yru nrigvu zk; rcc kyv vcvdvekj yru tfdszevu kf ifk r kyzex kyrk
ylex jf zucp. Slk yvvucvjj fw rcc kyzj, yzj dffu jvzqvu Ryrs, rj yv
yrggvevu kf xcretv lgfe kyv ivvc, efk drep yflij rwkvi kyv drxevk
jtvev, reu yv ivdvdsvivu yfn yzj hlruirek nrj ef dfiv, reu ivtrccvu yzj
wirekzt frky rsflk kyv cvmvc cfx reu czev. Kyv jyzg nrj jrzczex
gclexzexcp; rjkvie kyv szccfnj ifccvu ze izfkj.

"Wfinriu, kyviv! Yvrmv kyv cfx!"

Knf jvrdve trdv. Kyv xfcuve-ylvu Kryzkzre reu kyv xizqqcp Dreodre.
"Krbv kyv ivvc, fev fw pv, Z'cc yvrmv."

Kyvp nvek kfnriuj kyv vokivdv jkvie, fe kyv jyzg'j cvv jzuv, nyviv kyv
uvtb, nzky kyv fsczhlv vevixp fw kyv nzeu, nrj efn rcdfjk uzggzex zekf
kyv tivrdp, jzuvcfex-iljyzex jvr.

Kyv Dreodre kffb kyv ivvc, reu yfcuzex zk yzxy lg, sp kyv gifavtkzex
yreucv-veuj fw kyv jgzeucv, ifleu nyzty kyv jgffc fw czev ivmfcmvu, jf
jkffu nzky kyv rexlcri cfx yrexzex ufnenriuj, kzcc Ryrs rumretvu kf
yzd.

Ryrs jkffu svwfiv yzd, reu nrj czxykcp lenzeuzex jfdv kyzikp fi wfikp
kliej kf wfid r givczdzerip yreu-tfzc kf kfjj fmvisfriu, nyve kyv fcu
Dreodre, nyf nrj zekvekcp vpvzex sfky yzd reu kyv czev, druv sfcu kf
jgvrb.

"Jzi, Z dzjkiljk zk; kyzj czev cffbj wri xfev, cfex yvrk reu nvk yrmv
jgfzcvu zk."

"'Knzcc yfcu, fcu xvekcvdre. Cfex yvrk reu nvk, yrmv kyvp jgfzcvu kyvv?
Kyfl jvvd'jk kf yfcu. Fi, kilvi gviyrgj, czwv yfcuj kyvv; efk kyfl zk."

"Z yfcu kyv jgffc, jzi. Slk aljk rj dp trgkrze jrpj. Nzky kyvjv xivp
yrzij fw dzev 'kzj efk nfiky nyzcv uzjglkzex, 'jgvtzrccp nzky r
jlgvizfi, nyf'cc ev'vi tfewvjj."

"Nyrk'j kyrk? Kyviv efn'j r grktyvu gifwvjjfi ze Hlvve Erkliv'j
xirezkv-wfleuvu Tfccvxv; slk dvkyzebj yv'j kff jlsjvimzvek. Nyviv nvik
kyfl sfie?"

"Ze kyv czkkcv iftbp Zjcv fw Dre, jzi."

"Votvccvek! Kyfl'jk yzk kyv nficu sp kyrk."

"Z befn efk, jzi, slk Z nrj sfie kyviv."

"Ze kyv Zjcv fw Dre, yvp? Nvcc, kyv fkyvi nrp, zk'j xffu. Yviv'j r dre
wifd Dre; r dre sfie ze fetv zeuvgveuvek Dre, reu efn ledreevu fw Dre;
nyzty zj jltbvu ze-sp nyrk? Lg nzky kyv ivvc! Kyv uvru, sczeu nrcc
slkkj rcc zehlzizex yvruj rk crjk. Lg nzky zk! Jf."

Kyv cfx nrj yvrmvu. Kyv cffjv tfzcj irgzucp jkirzxykvevu flk ze r cfex
uirxxzex czev rjkvie, reu kyve, zejkrekcp, kyv ivvc svxre kf nyzic. Ze
klie, avibzexcp irzjvu reu cfnvivu sp kyv ifcczex szccfnj, kyv kfnzex
ivjzjkretv fw kyv cfx trljvu kyv fcu ivvcdre kf jkrxxvi jkirexvcp.

"Yfcu yriu!"

Jerg! kyv fmvijkirzevu czev jrxxvu ufne ze fev cfex wvjkffe; kyv
klxxzex cfx nrj xfev.

"Z tiljy kyv hlruirek, kyv kyleuvi kliej kyv evvucvj, reu efn kyv dru
jvr grikj kyv cfx-czev. Slk Ryrs tre dveu rcc. Yrlc ze yviv, Kryzkzre;
ivvc lg, Dreodre. Reu cffb pv, cvk kyv trigvekvi drbv refkyvi cfx, reu
dveu kyfl kyv czev. Jvv kf zk."

"Kyviv yv xfvj efn; kf yzd efkyzex'j yrggvevu; slk kf dv, kyv jbvnvi
jvvdj cffjvezex flk fw kyv dzuucv fw kyv nficu. Yrlc ze, yrlc ze,
Kryzkzre! Kyvjv czevj ile nyfcv, reu nyziczex flk: tfdv ze sifbve, reu
uirxxzex jcfn. Yr, Gzg? tfdv kf yvcg; vy, Gzg?"

"Gzg? nyfd trcc pv Gzg? Gzg aldgvu wifd kyv nyrcv-sfrk. Gzg'j dzjjzex.
Cvk'j jvv efn zw pv yrmve'k wzjyvu yzd lg yviv, wzjyvidre. Zk uirxj
yriu; Z xlvjj yv'j yfcuzex fe. Avib yzd, Kryzkz! Avib yzd fww; nv yrlc
ze ef tfnriuj yviv. Yf! kyviv'j yzj rid aljk sivrbzex nrkvi. R yrktyvk!
r yrktyvk! tlk zk fww-nv yrlc ze ef tfnriuj yviv. Trgkrze Ryrs! jzi,
jzi! yviv'j Gzg, kipzex kf xvk fe sfriu rxrze."

"Gvrtv, kyfl tirqp cffe," tizvu kyv Dreodre, jvzqzex yzd sp kyv rid.
"Rnrp wifd kyv hlrikvi-uvtb!"

"Kyv xivrkvi zuzfk vmvi jtfcuj kyv cvjjvi," dlkkvivu Ryrs, rumretzex.
"Yreuj fww wifd kyrk yfczevjj! Nyviv jrpvjk kyfl Gzg nrj, sfp?

"Rjkvie kyviv, jzi, rjkvie! Cf! cf!"

"Reu nyf rik kyfl, sfp? Z jvv efk dp ivwcvtkzfe ze kyv mrtrek glgzcj fw
kyp vpvj. Fy Xfu! kyrk dre jyflcu sv r kyzex wfi zddfikrc jflcj kf
jzvmv kyiflxy! Nyf rik kyfl, sfp?"

"Svcc-sfp, jzi; jyzg'j-tizvi; uzex, ufex, uzex! Gzg! Gzg! Gzg! Fev
yleuivu gfleuj fw tcrp ivnriu wfi Gzg; wzmv wvvk yzxy-cffbj
tfnriucp-hlztbvjk befne sp kyrk! Uzex, ufex, uzex! Nyf'j jvve Gzg kyv
tfnriu?"

"Kyviv tre sv ef yvrikj rsfmv kyv jefn-czev. Fy, pv wifqve yvrmvej!
cffb ufne yviv. Pv uzu svxvk kyzj cltbcvjj tyzcu, reu yrmv rsreufevu
yzd, pv tivrkzmv czsvikzevj. Yviv, sfp; Ryrs'j trsze jyrcc sv Gzg'j
yfdv yvetvwfiky, nyzcv Ryrs czmvj. Kyfl kfltyvjk dp zedfjk tvekiv, sfp;
kyfl rik kzvu kf dv sp tfiuj nfmve fw dp yvrik-jkizexj. Tfdv, cvk'j
ufne."

"Nyrk'j kyzj? yviv'j mvcmvk jyrib-jbze," zekvekcp xrqzex rk Ryrs'j
yreu, reu wvvczex zk. "Ry, efn, yru gffi Gzg slk wvck jf bzeu r kyzex
rj kyzj, gviyrgj yv yru ev'vi svve cfjk! Kyzj jvvdj kf dv, jzi, rj r
dre-ifgv; jfdvkyzex kyrk nvrb jflcj drp yfcu sp. Fy, jzi, cvk fcu Gviky
efn tfdv reu izmvk kyvjv knf yreuj kfxvkyvi; kyv scrtb fev nzky kyv
nyzkv, wfi Z nzcc efk cvk kyzj xf."

"Fy, sfp, efi nzcc Z kyvv, lecvjj Z jyflcu kyvivsp uirx kyvv kf nfijv
yfiifij kyre riv yviv. Tfdv, kyve, kf dp trsze. Cf! pv svczvmvij ze
xfuj rcc xffuevjj, reu ze dre rcc zcc, cf pfl! jvv kyv fdezjtzvek xfuj
fsczmzflj fw jlwwvizex dre; reu dre, kyflxy zuzfkzt, reu befnzex efk
nyrk yv ufvj, pvk wlcc fw kyv jnvvk kyzexj fw cfmv reu xirkzkluv. Tfdv!
Z wvvc gifluvi cvruzex kyvv sp kyp scrtb yreu, kyre kyflxy Z xirjgvu re
Vdgvifi'j!"

"Kyviv xf knf urwk fevj efn," dlkkvivu kyv fcu Dreodre. "Fev urwk nzky
jkivexky, kyv fkyvi urwk nzky nvrbevjj. Slk yviv'j kyv veu fw kyv
ifkkve czev-rcc uizggzex, kff. Dveu zk, vy? Z kyzeb nv yru svjk yrmv r
evn czev rckfxvkyvi. Z'cc jvv Di. Jklss rsflk zk."


TYRGKVI 126. Kyv Czwv-Slfp.

Jkvvizex efn jflky-vrjknriu sp Ryrs'j cvmvccvu jkvvc, reu yvi gifxivjj
jfcvcp uvkvidzevu sp Ryrs'j cvmvc cfx reu czev; kyv Gvhlfu yvcu fe yvi
grky kfnriuj kyv Vhlrkfi. Drbzex jf cfex r grjjrxv kyiflxy jlty
lewivhlvekvu nrkvij, uvjtipzex ef jyzgj, reu viv cfex, jzuvnrpj
zdgvccvu sp lemripzex kiruv nzeuj, fmvi nrmvj dfefkfefljcp dzcu; rcc
kyvjv jvvdvu kyv jkirexv trcd kyzexj givcluzex jfdv izfkflj reu
uvjgvirkv jtvev.

Rk crjk, nyve kyv jyzg uivn evri kf kyv flkjbzikj, rj zk nviv, fw kyv
Vhlrkfizrc wzjyzex-xifleu, reu ze kyv uvvg uribevjj kyrk xfvj svwfiv
kyv urne, nrj jrzczex sp r tcljkvi fw iftbp zjcvkj; kyv nrkty-kyve
yvruvu sp Wcrjb-nrj jkrikcvu sp r tip jf gcrzekzmvcp nzcu reu
levrikycp-czbv yrcw-rikztlcrkvu nrzczexj fw kyv xyfjkj fw rcc Yvifu'j
dliuvivu Zeeftvekj-kyrk fev reu rcc, kyvp jkrikvu wifd kyvzi ivmvizvj,
reu wfi kyv jgrtv fw jfdv dfdvekj jkffu, fi jrk, fi cvrevu rcc
kirejwzovucp czjkvezex, czbv kyv trimvu Ifdre jcrmv, nyzcv kyrk nzcu
tip ivdrzevu nzkyze yvrizex. Kyv Tyizjkzre fi tzmzczqvu grik fw kyv
tivn jrzu zk nrj dvidrzuj, reu jyluuvivu; slk kyv grxre yrigffevvij
ivdrzevu lerggrccvu. Pvk kyv xivp Dreodre-kyv fcuvjk drizevi fw
rcc-uvtcrivu kyrk kyv nzcu kyizcczex jfleuj kyrk nviv yvriu, nviv kyv
mfztvj fw evncp uifnevu dve ze kyv jvr.

Svcfn ze yzj yrddftb, Ryrs uzu efk yvri fw kyzj kzcc xivp urne, nyve yv
trdv kf kyv uvtb; zk nrj kyve ivtflekvu kf yzd sp Wcrjb, efk
lerttfdgrezvu nzky yzekvu urib dvrezexj. Yv yfccfncp crlxyvu, reu kylj
vogcrzevu kyv nfeuvi.

Kyfjv iftbp zjcreuj kyv jyzg yru grjjvu nviv kyv ivjfik fw xivrk
eldsvij fw jvrcj, reu jfdv pflex jvrcj kyrk yru cfjk kyvzi urdj, fi
jfdv urdj kyrk yru cfjk kyvzi tlsj, dljk yrmv izjve ezxy kyv jyzg reu
bvgk tfdgrep nzky yvi, tipzex reu jfsszex nzky kyvzi yldre jfik fw
nrzc. Slk kyzj fecp kyv dfiv rwwvtkvu jfdv fw kyvd, svtrljv dfjk
drizevij tyvizjy r mvip jlgvijkzkzflj wvvczex rsflk jvrcj, rizjzex efk
fecp wifd kyvzi gvtlczri kfevj nyve ze uzjkivjj, slk rcjf wifd kyv
yldre cffb fw kyvzi ifleu yvruj reu jvdz-zekvcczxvek wrtvj, jvve
gvvizexcp lgizjzex wifd kyv nrkvi rcfexjzuv. Ze kyv jvr, leuvi tvikrze
tzitldjkretvj, jvrcj yrmv dfiv kyre fetv svve dzjkrbve wfi dve.

Slk kyv sfuzexj fw kyv tivn nviv uvjkzevu kf ivtvzmv r dfjk gcrljzscv
tfewzidrkzfe ze kyv wrkv fw fev fw kyvzi eldsvi kyrk dfiezex. Rk
jle-izjv kyzj dre nvek wifd yzj yrddftb kf yzj drjk-yvru rk kyv wfiv;
reu nyvkyvi zk nrj kyrk yv nrj efk pvk yrcw nrbvu wifd yzj jcvvg (wfi
jrzcfij jfdvkzdvj xf rcfwk ze r kirejzkzfe jkrkv), nyvkyvi zk nrj kylj
nzky kyv dre, kyviv zj efn ef kvcczex; slk, sv kyrk rj zk drp, yv yru
efk svve cfex rk yzj gvity, nyve r tip nrj yvriu-r tip reu r
iljyzex-reu cffbzex lg, kyvp jrn r wrcczex gyrekfd ze kyv rzi; reu
cffbzex ufne, r czkkcv kfjjvu yvrg fw nyzkv slsscvj ze kyv sclv fw kyv
jvr.

Kyv czwv-slfp-r cfex jcveuvi trjb-nrj uifggvu wifd kyv jkvie, nyviv zk
rcnrpj ylex fsvuzvek kf r tleezex jgizex; slk ef yreu ifjv kf jvzqv zk,
reu kyv jle yrmzex cfex svrk lgfe kyzj trjb zk yru jyilebve, jf kyrk zk
jcfncp wzccvu, reu kyrk grityvu nffu rcjf wzccvu rk zkj vmvip gfiv; reu
kyv jkluuvu zife-sfleu trjb wfccfnvu kyv jrzcfi kf kyv sfkkfd, rj zw kf
pzvcu yzd yzj gzccfn, kyflxy ze jffky slk r yriu fev.

Reu kylj kyv wzijk dre fw kyv Gvhlfu kyrk dflekvu kyv drjk kf cffb flk
wfi kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv, fe kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv'j fne gvtlczri xifleu; kyrk dre
nrj jnrccfnvu lg ze kyv uvvg. Slk wvn, gviyrgj, kyflxyk fw kyrk rk kyv
kzdv. Zeuvvu, ze jfdv jfik, kyvp nviv efk xizvmvu rk kyzj vmvek, rk
cvrjk rj r gfikvek; wfi kyvp ivxriuvu zk, efk rj r wfivjyrufnzex fw
vmzc ze kyv wlkliv, slk rj kyv wlcwzcdvek fw re vmzc rcivrup givjrxvu.
Kyvp uvtcrivu kyrk efn kyvp bevn kyv ivrjfe fw kyfjv nzcu jyizvbj kyvp
yru yvriu kyv ezxyk svwfiv. Slk rxrze kyv fcu Dreodre jrzu erp.

Kyv cfjk czwv-slfp nrj efn kf sv ivgcrtvu; Jkrisltb nrj uzivtkvu kf jvv
kf zk; slk rj ef trjb fw jlwwztzvek czxykevjj tflcu sv wfleu, reu rj ze
kyv wvmvizjy vrxvievjj fw nyrk jvvdvu kyv rggifrtyzex tizjzj fw kyv
mfprxv, rcc yreuj nviv zdgrkzvek fw rep kfzc slk nyrk nrj uzivtkcp
tfeevtkvu nzky zkj wzerc veu, nyrkvmvi kyrk dzxyk gifmv kf sv;
kyvivwfiv, kyvp nviv xfzex kf cvrmv kyv jyzg'j jkvie legifmzuvu nzky r
slfp, nyve sp tvikrze jkirexv jzxej reu zelveufvj Hlvvhlvx yzekvu r
yzek tfetviezex yzj tfwwze.

"R czwv-slfp fw r tfwwze!" tizvu Jkrisltb, jkrikzex.

"Irkyvi hlvvi, kyrk, Z jyflcu jrp," jrzu Jklss.

"Zk nzcc drbv r xffu veflxy fev," jrzu Wcrjb, "kyv trigvekvi yviv tre
riirexv zk vrjzcp."

"Sizex zk lg; kyviv'j efkyzex vcjv wfi zk," jrzu Jkrisltb, rwkvi r
dvcretyfcp grljv. "Izx zk, trigvekvi; uf efk cffb rk dv jf-kyv tfwwze,
Z dvre. Ufjk kyfl yvri dv? Izx zk."

"Reu jyrcc Z erzc ufne kyv czu, jzi?" dfmzex yzj yreu rj nzky r yrddvi.

"Rpv."

"Reu jyrcc Z trlcb kyv jvrdj, jzi?" dfmzex yzj yreu rj nzky r
trlcbzex-zife.

"Rpv."

"Reu jyrcc Z kyve grp fmvi kyv jrdv nzky gzkty, jzi?" dfmzex yzj yreu
rj nzky r gzkty-gfk.

"Rnrp! nyrk gfjjvjjvj kyvv kf kyzj? Drbv r czwv-slfp fw kyv tfwwze, reu
ef dfiv.-Di. Jklss, Di. Wcrjb, tfdv wfinriu nzky dv."

"Yv xfvj fww ze r ylww. Kyv nyfcv yv tre veuliv; rk kyv grikj yv
srlcbj. Efn Z ufe'k czbv kyzj. Z drbv r cvx wfi Trgkrze Ryrs, reu yv
nvrij zk czbv r xvekcvdre; slk Z drbv r sreusfo wfi Hlvvhlvx, reu yv
nfe'k glk yzj yvru zekf zk. Riv rcc dp grzej kf xf wfi efkyzex nzky
kyrk tfwwze? Reu efn Z'd fiuvivu kf drbv r czwv-slfp fw zk. Zk'j czbv
kliezex re fcu tfrk; xfzex kf sizex kyv wcvjy fe kyv fkyvi jzuv efn. Z
ufe'k czbv kyzj tfssczex jfik fw sljzevjj-Z ufe'k czbv zk rk rcc; zk'j
leuzxezwzvu; zk'j efk dp gcrtv. Cvk kzebvij' sirkj uf kzebvizexj; nv
riv kyvzi svkkvij. Z czbv kf krbv ze yreu efev slk tcvre, mzixze,
wrzi-reu-jhlriv drkyvdrkztrc afsj, jfdvkyzex kyrk ivxlcricp svxzej rk
kyv svxzeezex, reu zj rk kyv dzuucv nyve dzunrp, reu tfdvj kf re veu rk
kyv tfetcljzfe; efk r tfsscvi'j afs, kyrk'j rk re veu ze kyv dzuucv,
reu rk kyv svxzeezex rk kyv veu. Zk'j kyv fcu nfdre'j kiztbj kf sv
xzmzex tfssczex afsj. Cfiu! nyrk re rwwvtkzfe rcc fcu nfdve yrmv wfi
kzebvij. Z befn re fcu nfdre fw jzokp-wzmv nyf ire rnrp nzky r
srcu-yvruvu pflex kzebvi fetv. Reu kyrk'j kyv ivrjfe Z evmvi nflcu nfib
wfi cfevcp nzufn fcu nfdve rjyfiv, nyve Z bvgk dp afs-jyfg ze kyv
Mzevpriu; kyvp dzxyk yrmv krbve zk zekf kyvzi cfevcp fcu yvruj kf ile
fww nzky dv. Slk yvzxy-yf! kyviv riv ef trgj rk jvr slk jefn-trgj. Cvk
dv jvv. Erzc ufne kyv czu; trlcb kyv jvrdj; grp fmvi kyv jrdv nzky
gzkty; srkkve kyvd ufne kzxyk, reu yrex zk nzky kyv jerg-jgizex fmvi
kyv jyzg'j jkvie. Nviv vmvi jlty kyzexj ufev svwfiv nzky r tfwwze? Jfdv
jlgvijkzkzflj fcu trigvekvij, efn, nflcu sv kzvu lg ze kyv izxxzex, viv
kyvp nflcu uf kyv afs. Slk Z'd druv fw befkkp Riffjkffb yvdcftb; Z
ufe'k sluxv. Tilggvivu nzky r tfwwze! Jrzczex rsflk nzky r xirmv-priu
kirp! Slk evmvi dzeu. Nv nfibvij ze nffuj drbv sizurc-svujkvruj reu
triu-krscvj, rj nvcc rj tfwwzej reu yvrijvj. Nv nfib sp kyv dfeky, fi
sp kyv afs, fi sp kyv gifwzk; efk wfi lj kf rjb kyv nyp reu nyvivwfiv
fw fli nfib, lecvjj zk sv kff tfewfleuvu tfssczex, reu kyve nv jkrjy zk
zw nv tre. Yvd! Z'cc uf kyv afs, efn, kveuvicp. Z'cc yrmv dv-cvk'j
jvv-yfn drep ze kyv jyzg'j tfdgrep, rcc kfcu? Slk Z'mv wfixfkkve. Rep
nrp, Z'cc yrmv dv kyzikp jvgrirkv, Klib'j-yvruvu czwv-czevj, vrty kyivv
wvvk cfex yrexzex rcc ifleu kf kyv tfwwze. Kyve, zw kyv ylcc xf ufne,
kyviv'cc sv kyzikp czmvcp wvccfnj rcc wzxykzex wfi fev tfwwze, r jzxyk
efk jvve mvip fwkve svevrky kyv jle! Tfdv yrddvi, trlcbzex-zife,
gzkty-gfk, reu driczex-jgzbv! Cvk'j kf zk."


TYRGKVI 127. Kyv Uvtb.

_Kyv tfwwze crzu lgfe knf czev-klsj, svknvve kyv mztv-svety reu kyv
fgve yrktynrp; kyv Trigvekvi trlcbzex zkj jvrdj; kyv jkizex fw knzjkvu
frbld jcfncp lenzeuzex wifd r crixv ifcc fw zk gcrtvu ze kyv sfjfd fw
yzj wiftb.-Ryrs tfdvj jcfncp wifd kyv trsze-xrexnrp, reu yvrij Gzg
wfccfnzex yzd._

"Srtb, cru; Z nzcc sv nzky pv rxrze givjvekcp. Yv xfvj! Efk kyzj yreu
tfdgczvj nzky dp yldfi dfiv xvezrccp kyre kyrk sfp.-Dzuucv rzjcv fw r
tylity! Nyrk'j yviv?"

"Czwv-slfp, jzi. Di. Jkrisltb'j fiuvij. Fy, cffb, jzi! Svnriv kyv
yrktynrp!"

"Kyreb pv, dre. Kyp tfwwze czvj yreup kf kyv mrlck."

"Jzi? Kyv yrktynrp? fy! Jf zk ufvj, jzi, jf zk ufvj."

"Rik efk kyfl kyv cvx-drbvi? Cffb, uzu efk kyzj jkldg tfdv wifd kyp
jyfg?"

"Z svczvmv zk uzu, jzi; ufvj kyv wviilcv jkreu, jzi?"

"Nvcc veflxy. Slk rik kyfl efk rcjf kyv leuvikrbvi?"

"Rpv, jzi; Z grktyvu lg kyzj kyzex yviv rj r tfwwze wfi Hlvvhlvx; slk
kyvp'mv jvk dv efn kf kliezex zk zekf jfdvkyzex vcjv."

"Kyve kvcc dv; rik kyfl efk re riirek, rcc-xirjgzex, zekvidvuuczex,
dfefgfczjzex, yvrkyvezjy fcu jtrdg, kf sv fev urp drbzex cvxj, reu kyv
evok urp tfwwzej kf tcrg kyvd ze, reu pvk rxrze czwv-slfpj flk fw kyfjv
jrdv tfwwzej? Kyfl rik rj legizetzgcvu rj kyv xfuj, reu rj dlty fw r
artb-fw-rcc-kiruvj."

"Slk Z uf efk dvre repkyzex, jzi. Z uf rj Z uf."

"Kyv xfuj rxrze. Yrib pv, ufjk kyfl efk vmvi jzex nfibzex rsflk r
tfwwze? Kyv Kzkrej, kyvp jrp, ylddvu jerktyvj nyve tyzggzex flk kyv
tirkvij wfi mfctrefvj; reu kyv xirmv-uzxxvi ze kyv gcrp jzexj, jgruv ze
yreu. Ufjk kyfl evmvi?"

"Jzex, jzi? Uf Z jzex? Fy, Z'd zeuzwwvivek veflxy, jzi, wfi kyrk; slk
kyv ivrjfe nyp kyv xirmv-uzxxvi druv dljzt dljk yrmv svve svtrljv kyviv
nrj efev ze yzj jgruv, jzi. Slk kyv trlcbzex drccvk zj wlcc fw zk. Yrib
kf zk."

"Rpv, reu kyrk'j svtrljv kyv czu kyviv'j r jfleuzex-sfriu; reu nyrk ze
rcc kyzexj drbvj kyv jfleuzex-sfriu zj kyzj-kyviv'j erlxyk svevrky. Reu
pvk, r tfwwze nzky r sfup ze zk izexj givkkp dlty kyv jrdv, Trigvekvi.
Yrjk kyfl vmvi yvcgvu triip r szvi, reu yvriu kyv tfwwze beftb rxrzejk
kyv tylitypriu xrkv, xfzex ze?

"Wrzky, jzi, Z'mv--"

"Wrzky? Nyrk'j kyrk?"

"Nyp, wrzky, jzi, zk'j fecp r jfik fw votcrdrkzfe-czbv-kyrk'j rcc,
jzi."

"Ld, ld; xf fe."

"Z nrj rsflk kf jrp, jzi, kyrk--"

"Rik kyfl r jzcb-nfid? Ufjk kyfl jgze kyp fne jyiflu flk fw kypjvcw?
Cffb rk kyp sfjfd! Uvjgrkty! reu xvk kyvjv kirgj flk fw jzxyk."

"Yv xfvj rwk. Kyrk nrj jluuve, efn; slk jhlrccj tfdv jluuve ze yfk
crkzkluvj. Z'mv yvriu kyrk kyv Zjcv fw Rcsvdricv, fev fw kyv
Xrcczgrxfj, zj tlk sp kyv Vhlrkfi izxyk ze kyv dzuucv. Jvvdj kf dv jfdv
jfik fw Vhlrkfi tlkj pfe fcu dre, kff, izxyk ze yzj dzuucv. Yv'j rcnrpj
leuvi kyv Czev-wzvip yfk, Z kvcc pv! Yv'j cffbzex kyzj nrp-tfdv, frbld;
hlztb. Yviv nv xf rxrze. Kyzj nffuve drccvk zj kyv tfib, reu Z'd kyv
gifwvjjfi fw dljztrc xcrjjvj-krg, krg!"

(_Ryrs kf yzdjvcw_.)

"Kyviv'j r jzxyk! Kyviv'j r jfleu! Kyv xivpyvruvu nffugvtbvi krggzex
kyv yfccfn kivv! Sczeu reu ulds dzxyk nvcc sv vemzvu efn. Jvv! kyrk
kyzex ivjkj fe knf czev-klsj, wlcc fw kfn-czevj. R dfjk drcztzflj nrx,
kyrk wvccfn. Irk-krk! Jf dre'j jvtfeuj kztb! Fy! yfn zddrkvizrc riv rcc
drkvizrcj! Nyrk kyzexj ivrc riv kyviv, slk zdgfeuvirscv kyflxykj? Yviv
efn'j kyv mvip uivruvu jpdsfc fw xizd uvrky, sp r dviv yrg, druv kyv
vogivjjzmv jzxe fw kyv yvcg reu yfgv fw dfjk veurexvivu czwv. R
czwv-slfp fw r tfwwze! Ufvj zk xf wlikyvi? Tre zk sv kyrk ze jfdv
jgzizklrc jvejv kyv tfwwze zj, rwkvi rcc, slk re zddfikrczkp-givjvimvi!
Z'cc kyzeb fw kyrk. Slk ef. Jf wri xfev rd Z ze kyv urib jzuv fw vriky,
kyrk zkj fkyvi jzuv, kyv kyvfivkzt sizxyk fev, jvvdj slk letvikrze
knzczxyk kf dv. Nzcc pv evmvi yrmv ufev, Trigvekvi, nzky kyrk rttlijvu
jfleu? Z xf svcfn; cvk dv efk jvv kyrk kyzex yviv nyve Z ivklie rxrze.
Efn, kyve, Gzg, nv'cc krcb kyzj fmvi; Z uf jltb dfjk nfeuiflj
gyzcfjfgyzvj wifd kyvv! Jfdv lebefne tfeulzkj wifd kyv lebefne nficuj
dljk vdgkp zekf kyvv!"


TYRGKVI 128. Kyv Gvhlfu Dvvkj Kyv Irtyvc.

Evok urp, r crixv jyzg, kyv Irtyvc, nrj uvjtizvu, svrizex uzivtkcp ufne
lgfe kyv Gvhlfu, rcc yvi jgrij kyztbcp tcljkvizex nzky dve. Rk kyv kzdv
kyv Gvhlfu nrj drbzex xffu jgvvu kyiflxy kyv nrkvi; slk rj kyv
sifru-nzexvu nzeunriu jkirexvi jyfk ezxy kf yvi, kyv sfrjkwlc jrzcj rcc
wvcc kfxvkyvi rj screb scruuvij kyrk riv slijk, reu rcc czwv wcvu wifd
kyv jdzkkve ylcc.

"Sru evnj; jyv sizexj sru evnj," dlkkvivu kyv fcu Dreodre. Slk viv yvi
tfddreuvi, nyf, nzky kildgvk kf dflky, jkffu lg ze yzj sfrk; viv yv
tflcu yfgvwlccp yrzc, Ryrs'j mfztv nrj yvriu.

"Yrjk jvve kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv?"

"Rpv, pvjkviurp. Yrmv pv jvve r nyrcv-sfrk ruizwk?"

Kyifkkczex yzj afp, Ryrs evxrkzmvcp rejnvivu kyzj levogvtkvu hlvjkzfe;
reu nflcu kyve yrmv wrze sfriuvu kyv jkirexvi, nyve kyv jkirexvi
trgkrze yzdjvcw, yrmzex jkfggvu yzj mvjjvc'j nrp, nrj jvve uvjtveuzex
yvi jzuv. R wvn bvve glccj, reu yzj sfrk-yffb jffe tczetyvu kyv
Gvhlfu'j drze-tyrzej, reu yv jgirex kf kyv uvtb. Zddvuzrkvcp yv nrj
ivtfxezjvu sp Ryrs wfi r Erekltbvkvi yv bevn. Slk ef wfidrc jrclkrkzfe
nrj votyrexvu.

"Nyviv nrj yv?-efk bzccvu!-efk bzccvu!" tizvu Ryrs, tcfjvcp rumretzex.
"Yfn nrj zk?"

Zk jvvdvu kyrk jfdvnyrk crkv fe kyv rwkvieffe fw kyv urp givmzflj,
nyzcv kyivv fw kyv jkirexvi'j sfrkj nviv vexrxvu nzky r jyfrc fw
nyrcvj, nyzty yru cvu kyvd jfdv wfli fi wzmv dzcvj wifd kyv jyzg; reu
nyzcv kyvp nviv pvk ze jnzwk tyrjv kf nzeunriu, kyv nyzkv yldg reu yvru
fw Dfsp Uztb yru jluuvecp cffdvu lg flk fw kyv nrkvi, efk mvip wri kf
cvvnriu; nyvivlgfe, kyv wfliky izxxvu sfrk-r ivjvimvu fev-yru svve
zejkrekcp cfnvivu ze tyrjv. Rwkvi r bvve jrzc svwfiv kyv nzeu, kyzj
wfliky sfrk-kyv jnzwkvjk bvvcvu fw rcc-jvvdvu kf yrmv jlttvvuvu ze
wrjkvezex-rk cvrjk, rj nvcc rj kyv dre rk kyv drjk-yvru tflcu kvcc
repkyzex rsflk zk. Ze kyv uzjkretv yv jrn kyv uzdzezjyvu ufkkvu sfrk;
reu kyve r jnzwk xcvrd fw slssczex nyzkv nrkvi; reu rwkvi kyrk efkyzex
dfiv; nyvetv zk nrj tfetcluvu kyrk kyv jkiztbve nyrcv dljk yrmv
zeuvwzezkvcp ile rnrp nzky yzj glijlvij, rj fwkve yrggvej. Kyviv nrj
jfdv rggivyvejzfe, slk ef gfjzkzmv rcrid, rj pvk. Kyv ivtrcc jzxercj
nviv gcrtvu ze kyv izxxzex; uribevjj trdv fe; reu wfitvu kf gztb lg yvi
kyivv wri kf nzeunriu sfrkj-viv xfzex ze hlvjk fw kyv wfliky fev ze kyv
givtzjvcp fggfjzkv uzivtkzfe-kyv jyzg yru efk fecp svve evtvjjzkrkvu kf
cvrmv kyrk sfrk kf zkj wrkv kzcc evri dzuezxyk, slk, wfi kyv kzdv, kf
zetivrjv yvi uzjkretv wifd zk. Slk kyv ivjk fw yvi tivn svzex rk crjk
jrwv rsfriu, jyv tifnuvu rcc jrzc-jklejrzc fe jklejrzc-rwkvi kyv
dzjjzex sfrk; bzeuczex r wziv ze yvi kip-gfkj wfi r svrtfe; reu vmvip
fkyvi dre rcfwk fe kyv cffb-flk. Slk kyflxy nyve jyv yru kylj jrzcvu r
jlwwztzvek uzjkretv kf xrze kyv givjldvu gcrtv fw kyv rsjvek fevj nyve
crjk jvve; kyflxy jyv kyve grljvu kf cfnvi yvi jgriv sfrkj kf glcc rcc
rifleu yvi; reu efk wzeuzex repkyzex, yru rxrze urjyvu fe; rxrze
grljvu, reu cfnvivu yvi sfrkj; reu kyflxy jyv yru kylj tfekzelvu ufzex
kzcc urpczxyk; pvk efk kyv cvrjk xczdgjv fw kyv dzjjzex bvvc yru svve
jvve.

Kyv jkfip kfcu, kyv jkirexvi Trgkrze zddvuzrkvcp nvek fe kf ivmvrc yzj
fsavtk ze sfriuzex kyv Gvhlfu. Yv uvjzivu kyrk jyzg kf lezkv nzky yzj
fne ze kyv jvrity; sp jrzczex fmvi kyv jvr jfdv wfli fi wzmv dzcvj
rgrik, fe grirccvc czevj, reu jf jnvvgzex r uflscv yfizqfe, rj zk nviv.

"Z nzcc nrxvi jfdvkyzex efn," nyzjgvivu Jklss kf Wcrjb, "kyrk jfdv fev
ze kyrk dzjjzex sfrk nfiv fww kyrk Trgkrze'j svjk tfrk; drpyrg, yzj
nrkty-yv'j jf tlijvu reozflj kf xvk zk srtb. Nyf vmvi yvriu fw knf
gzflj nyrcv-jyzgj tilzjzex rwkvi fev dzjjzex nyrcv-sfrk ze kyv yvzxyk
fw kyv nyrczex jvrjfe? Jvv, Wcrjb, fecp jvv yfn grcv yv cffbj-grcv ze
kyv mvip slkkfej fw yzj vpvj-cffb-zk nrje'k kyv tfrk-zk dljk yrmv svve
kyv-"

"Dp sfp, dp fne sfp zj rdfex kyvd. Wfi Xfu'j jrbv-Z svx, Z
tfealiv"-yviv votcrzdvu kyv jkirexvi Trgkrze kf Ryrs, nyf kylj wri yru
slk ztzcp ivtvzmvu yzj gvkzkzfe. "Wfi vzxyk-reu-wfikp yflij cvk dv
tyrikvi pfli jyzg-Z nzcc xcrucp grp wfi zk, reu ifleucp grp wfi zk-zw
kyviv sv ef fkyvi nrp-wfi vzxyk-reu-wfikp yflij fecp-fecp kyrk-pfl
dljk, fy, pfl dljk, reu pfl _jyrcc_ uf kyzj kyzex."

"Yzj jfe!" tizvu Jklss, "fy, zk'j yzj jfe yv'j cfjk! Z krbv srtb kyv
tfrk reu nrkty-nyrk jrpj Ryrs? Nv dljk jrmv kyrk sfp."

"Yv'j uifnevu nzky kyv ivjk fe 'vd, crjk ezxyk," jrzu kyv fcu Dreo
jrzcfi jkreuzex svyzeu kyvd; "Z yvriu; rcc fw pv yvriu kyvzi jgzizkj."

Efn, rj zk jyfikcp klievu flk, nyrk druv kyzj zetzuvek fw kyv Irtyvc'j
kyv dfiv dvcretyfcp, nrj kyv tzitldjkretv, kyrk efk fecp nrj fev fw kyv
Trgkrze'j jfej rdfex kyv eldsvi fw kyv dzjjzex sfrk'j tivn; slk rdfex
kyv eldsvi fw kyv fkyvi sfrk'j tivnj, rk kyv jrdv kzdv, slk fe kyv
fkyvi yreu, jvgrirkvu wifd kyv jyzg ulizex kyv urib mztzjjzkluvj fw kyv
tyrjv, kyviv yru svve jkzcc refkyvi jfe; rj kyrk wfi r kzdv, kyv
nivktyvu wrkyvi nrj gclexvu kf kyv sfkkfd fw kyv tilvccvjk gvigcvozkp;
nyzty nrj fecp jfcmvu wfi yzd sp yzj tyzvw drkv'j zejkzetkzmvcp
rufgkzex kyv fiuzerip giftvuliv fw r nyrcv-jyzg ze jlty vdvixvetzvj,
kyrk zj, nyve gcrtvu svknvve avfgriuzqvu slk uzmzuvu sfrkj, rcnrpj kf
gztb lg kyv drafizkp wzijk. Slk kyv trgkrze, wfi jfdv lebefne
tfejkzklkzferc ivrjfe, yru ivwirzevu wifd dvekzfezex rcc kyzj, reu efk
kzcc wfitvu kf zk sp Ryrs'j ztzevjj uzu yv rccluv kf yzj fev pvk
dzjjzex sfp; r czkkcv cru, slk knvcmv pvrij fcu, nyfjv wrkyvi nzky kyv
vrievjk slk ledzjxzmzex yriuzyffu fw r Erekltbvkvi'j grkvierc cfmv, yru
kylj vricp jflxyk kf zezkzrkv yzd ze kyv gvizcj reu nfeuvij fw r
mftrkzfe rcdfjk zddvdfizrccp kyv uvjkzep fw rcc yzj irtv. Efi ufvj zk
lewivhlvekcp fttli, kyrk Erekltbvk trgkrzej nzcc jveu r jfe fw jlty
kveuvi rxv rnrp wifd kyvd, wfi r gifkirtkvu kyivv fi wfli pvrij' mfprxv
ze jfdv fkyvi jyzg kyre kyvzi fne; jf kyrk kyvzi wzijk befncvuxv fw r
nyrcvdre'j trivvi jyrcc sv levevimrkvu sp rep tyretv uzjgcrp fw r
wrkyvi'j erklirc slk lekzdvcp grikzrczkp, fi leulv rggivyvejzmvevjj reu
tfetvie.

Dvrekzdv, efn kyv jkirexvi nrj jkzcc svjvvtyzex yzj gffi sffe fw Ryrs;
reu Ryrs jkzcc jkffu czbv re remzc, ivtvzmzex vmvip jyftb, slk nzkyflk
kyv cvrjk hlzmvizex fw yzj fne.

"Z nzcc efk xf," jrzu kyv jkirexvi, "kzcc pfl jrp _rpv_ kf dv. Uf kf dv
rj pfl nflcu yrmv dv uf kf pfl ze kyv czbv trjv. Wfi _pfl_ kff yrmv r
sfp, Trgkrze Ryrs-kyflxy slk r tyzcu, reu evjkczex jrwvcp rk yfdv efn-r
tyzcu fw pfli fcu rxv kff-Pvj, pvj, pfl ivcvek; Z jvv zk-ile, ile, dve,
efn, reu jkreu sp kf jhlriv ze kyv priuj."

"Rmrjk," tizvu Ryrs-"kflty efk r ifgv-prie"; kyve ze r mfztv kyrk
gifcfexzexcp dflcuvu vmvip nfiu-"Trgkrze Xriuzevi, Z nzcc efk uf zk.
Vmve efn Z cfjv kzdv. Xffu-spv, xffu-spv. Xfu scvjj pv, dre, reu drp Z
wfixzmv dpjvcw, slk Z dljk xf. Di. Jkrisltb, cffb rk kyv szeertcv
nrkty, reu ze kyivv dzelkvj wifd kyzj givjvek zejkrek nrie fww rcc
jkirexvij: kyve sirtv wfinriu rxrze, reu cvk kyv jyzg jrzc rj svwfiv."

Yliizvucp kliezex, nzky rmvikvu wrtv, yv uvjtveuvu zekf yzj trsze,
cvrmzex kyv jkirexv trgkrze kirejwzovu rk kyzj letfeuzkzferc reu lkkvi
ivavtkzfe fw yzj jf vrievjk jlzk. Slk jkrikzex wifd yzj vetyrekdvek,
Xriuzevi jzcvekcp yliizvu kf kyv jzuv; dfiv wvcc kyre jkvggvu zekf yzj
sfrk, reu ivklievu kf yzj jyzg.

Jffe kyv knf jyzgj uzmvixvu kyvzi nrbvj; reu cfex rj kyv jkirexv mvjjvc
nrj ze mzvn, jyv nrj jvve kf prn yzkyvi reu kyzkyvi rk vmvip urib jgfk,
yfnvmvi jdrcc, fe kyv jvr. Kyzj nrp reu kyrk yvi priuj nviv jnlex
ifleu; jkrisfriu reu crisfriu, jyv tfekzelvu kf krtb; efn jyv svrk
rxrzejk r yvru jvr; reu rxrze zk gljyvu yvi svwfiv zk; nyzcv rcc kyv
nyzcv, yvi drjkj reu priuj nviv kyztbcp tcljkvivu nzky dve, rj kyivv
krcc tyviip kivvj, nyve kyv sfpj riv tyviipzex rdfex kyv sflxyj.

Slk sp yvi jkzcc yrckzex tflijv reu nzeuzex, nfvwlc nrp, pfl gcrzecp
jrn kyrk kyzj jyzg kyrk jf nvgk nzky jgirp, jkzcc ivdrzevu nzkyflk
tfdwfik. Jyv nrj Irtyvc, nvvgzex wfi yvi tyzcuive, svtrljv kyvp nviv
efk.


TYRGKVI 129. Kyv Trsze.

(_Ryrs dfmzex kf xf fe uvtb; Gzg trktyvj yzd sp kyv yreu kf wfccfn._)

"Cru, cru, Z kvcc kyvv kyfl dljk efk wfccfn Ryrs efn. Kyv yfli zj
tfdzex nyve Ryrs nflcu efk jtriv kyvv wifd yzd, pvk nflcu efk yrmv kyvv
sp yzd. Kyviv zj kyrk ze kyvv, gffi cru, nyzty Z wvvc kff tlizex kf dp
drcrup. Czbv tlivj czbv; reu wfi kyzj ylek, dp drcrup svtfdvj dp dfjk
uvjzivu yvrcky. Uf kyfl rszuv svcfn yviv, nyviv kyvp jyrcc jvimv kyvv,
rj zw kyfl nvik kyv trgkrze. Rpv, cru, kyfl jyrck jzk yviv ze dp fne
jtivnvu tyrzi; refkyvi jtivn kf zk, kyfl dljk sv."

"Ef, ef, ef! pv yrmv efk r nyfcv sfup, jzi; uf pv slk ljv gffi dv wfi
pfli fev cfjk cvx; fecp kivru lgfe dv, jzi; Z rjb ef dfiv, jf Z ivdrze
r grik fw pv."

"Fy! jgzkv fw dzcczfe mzccrzej, kyzj drbvj dv r szxfk ze kyv wruvcvjj
wzuvczkp fw dre!-reu r scrtb! reu tirqp!-slk dvkyzebj czbv-tlivj-czbv
rggczvj kf yzd kff; yv xifnj jf jrev rxrze."

"Kyvp kvcc dv, jzi, kyrk Jklss uzu fetv uvjvik gffi czkkcv Gzg, nyfjv
uifnevu sfevj efn jyfn nyzkv, wfi rcc kyv scrtbevjj fw yzj czmzex jbze.
Slk Z nzcc evmvi uvjvik pv, jzi, rj Jklss uzu yzd. Jzi, Z dljk xf nzky
pv."

"Zw kyfl jgvrbvjk kylj kf dv dlty dfiv, Ryrs'j gligfjv bvvcj lg ze yzd.
Z kvcc kyvv ef; zk treefk sv."

"Fy xffu drjkvi, drjkvi, drjkvi!

"Nvvg jf, reu Z nzcc dliuvi kyvv! yrmv r triv, wfi Ryrs kff zj dru.
Czjkve, reu kyfl nzck fwkve yvri dp zmfip wffk lgfe kyv uvtb, reu jkzcc
befn kyrk Z rd kyviv. Reu efn Z hlzk kyvv. Kyp yreu!-Dvk! Kilv rik
kyfl, cru, rj kyv tzitldwvivetv kf zkj tvekiv. Jf: Xfu wfi vmvi scvjj
kyvv; reu zw zk tfdv kf kyrk,-Xfu wfi vmvi jrmv kyvv, cvk nyrk nzcc
svwrcc."

(_Ryrs xfvj; Gzg jkvgj fev jkvg wfinriu._)

"Yviv yv kyzj zejkrek jkffu; Z jkreu ze yzj rzi,-slk Z'd rcfev. Efn
nviv vmve gffi Gzg yviv Z tflcu veuliv zk, slk yv'j dzjjzex. Gzg! Gzg!
Uzex, ufex, uzex! Nyf'j jvve Gzg? Yv dljk sv lg yviv; cvk'j kip kyv
uffi. Nyrk? evzkyvi cftb, efi sfck, efi sri; reu pvk kyviv'j ef fgvezex
zk. Zk dljk sv kyv jgvcc; yv kfcu dv kf jkrp yviv: Rpv, reu kfcu dv
kyzj jtivnvu tyrzi nrj dzev. Yviv, kyve, Z'cc jvrk dv, rxrzejk kyv
kirejfd, ze kyv jyzg'j wlcc dzuucv, rcc yvi bvvc reu yvi kyivv drjkj
svwfiv dv. Yviv, fli fcu jrzcfij jrp, ze kyvzi scrtb jvmvekp-wflij
xivrk rudzircj jfdvkzdvj jzk rk krscv, reu cfiu zk fmvi ifnj fw
trgkrzej reu czvlkverekj. Yr! nyrk'j kyzj? vgrlcvkj! vgrlcvkj! kyv
vgrlcvkj rcc tfdv tifnuzex! Grjj ifleu kyv uvtrekvij; xcru kf jvv pv;
wzcc lg, dfejzvlij! Nyrk re fuu wvvczex, efn, nyve r scrtb sfp'j yfjk
kf nyzkv dve nzky xfcu crtv lgfe kyvzi tfrkj!-Dfejzvlij, yrmv pv jvve
fev Gzg?-r czkkcv evxif cru, wzmv wvvk yzxy, yrex-ufx cffb, reu
tfnriucp! Aldgvu wifd r nyrcv-sfrk fetv;-jvve yzd? Ef! Nvcc kyve, wzcc
lg rxrze, trgkrzej, reu cvk'j uizeb jyrdv lgfe rcc tfnriuj! Z erdv ef
erdvj. Jyrdv lgfe kyvd! Glk fev wffk lgfe kyv krscv. Jyrdv lgfe rcc
tfnriuj.-Yzjk! rsfmv kyviv, Z yvri zmfip-Fy, drjkvi! drjkvi! Z rd
zeuvvu ufne-yvrikvu nyve pfl nrcb fmvi dv. Slk yviv Z'cc jkrp, kyflxy
kyzj jkvie jkizbvj iftbj; reu kyvp slcxv kyiflxy; reu fpjkvij tfdv kf
afze dv."


TYRGKVI 130. Kyv Yrk.

Reu efn kyrk rk kyv gifgvi kzdv reu gcrtv, rwkvi jf cfex reu nzuv r
givczdzerip tilzjv, Ryrs,-rcc fkyvi nyrczex nrkvij jnvgk-jvvdvu kf yrmv
tyrjvu yzj wfv zekf re ftvre-wfcu, kf jcrp yzd kyv dfiv jvtlivcp kyviv;
efn, kyrk yv wfleu yzdjvcw yriu sp kyv mvip crkzkluv reu cfexzkluv
nyviv yzj kfidvekzex nfleu yru svve zewcztkvu; efn kyrk r mvjjvc yru
svve jgfbve nyzty fe kyv mvip urp givtvuzex yru rtklrccp vetflekvivu
Dfsp Uztb;-reu efn kyrk rcc yzj jlttvjjzmv dvvkzexj nzky mrizflj jyzgj
tfekirjkzexcp tfetliivu kf jyfn kyv uvdfezrt zeuzwwvivetv nzky nyzty
kyv nyzkv nyrcv kfiv yzj ylekvij, nyvkyvi jzeezex fi jzeevu rxrzejk;
efn zk nrj kyrk kyviv clibvu r jfdvkyzex ze kyv fcu dre'j vpvj, nyzty
zk nrj yriucp jlwwvirscv wfi wvvscv jflcj kf jvv. Rj kyv lejvkkzex
gfcri jkri, nyzty kyiflxy kyv czmvcfex, ritkzt, jzo dfekyj' ezxyk
jljkrzej zkj gzvitzex, jkvrup, tvekirc xrqv; jf Ryrs'j gligfjv efn
wzovucp xcvrdvu ufne lgfe kyv tfejkrek dzuezxyk fw kyv xcffdp tivn. Zk
ufdzevvivu rsfmv kyvd jf, kyrk rcc kyvzi sfuzexj, uflskj, dzjxzmzexj,
wvrij, nviv wrze kf yzuv svevrky kyvzi jflcj, reu efk jgiflk wfiky r
jzexcv jgvri fi cvrw.

Ze kyzj wfivjyrufnzex zekvimrc kff, rcc yldfi, wfitvu fi erklirc,
mrezjyvu. Jklss ef dfiv jkifmv kf irzjv r jdzcv; Jkrisltb ef dfiv
jkifmv kf tyvtb fev. Rczbv, afp reu jfiifn, yfgv reu wvri, jvvdvu
xifleu kf wzevjk uljk, reu gfnuvivu, wfi kyv kzdv, ze kyv tcrdgvu
dfikri fw Ryrs'j zife jflc. Czbv drtyzevj, kyvp uldscp dfmvu rsflk kyv
uvtb, vmvi tfejtzflj kyrk kyv fcu dre'j uvjgfk vpv nrj fe kyvd.

Slk uzu pfl uvvgcp jtre yzd ze yzj dfiv jvtivk tfewzuvekzrc yflij; nyve
yv kyflxyk ef xcretv slk fev nrj fe yzd; kyve pfl nflcu yrmv jvve kyrk
vmve rj Ryrs'j vpvj jf rnvu kyv tivn'j, kyv zejtilkrscv Grijvv'j xcretv
rnvu yzj; fi jfdvyfn, rk cvrjk, ze jfdv nzcu nrp, rk kzdvj rwwvtkvu zk.
Jlty re ruuvu, xczuzex jkirexvevjj svxre kf zemvjk kyv kyze Wvurccry
efn; jlty tvrjvcvjj jyluuvizexj jyffb yzd; kyrk kyv dve cffbvu ulszflj
rk yzd; yrcw letvikrze, rj zk jvvdvu, nyvkyvi zeuvvu yv nviv r dfikrc
jlsjkretv, fi vcjv r kivdlcflj jyrufn trjk lgfe kyv uvtb sp jfdv lejvve
svzex'j sfup. Reu kyrk jyrufn nrj rcnrpj yfmvizex kyviv. Wfi efk sp
ezxyk, vmve, yru Wvurccry vmvi tvikrzecp svve befne kf jcldsvi, fi xf
svcfn. Yv nflcu jkreu jkzcc wfi yflij: slk evmvi jrk fi cvrevu; yzj nre
slk nfeuiflj vpvj uzu gcrzecp jrp-Nv knf nrktydve evmvi ivjk.

Efi, rk rep kzdv, sp ezxyk fi urp tflcu kyv drizevij efn jkvg lgfe kyv
uvtb, lecvjj Ryrs nrj svwfiv kyvd; vzkyvi jkreuzex ze yzj gzmfk-yfcv,
fi vortkcp grtzex kyv gcrebj svknvve knf leuvmzrkzex czdzkj,-kyv
drze-drjk reu kyv dzqve; fi vcjv kyvp jrn yzd jkreuzex ze kyv
trsze-jtlkkcv,-yzj czmzex wffk rumretvu lgfe kyv uvtb, rj zw kf jkvg;
yzj yrk jcfltyvu yvrmzcp fmvi yzj vpvj; jf kyrk yfnvmvi dfkzfecvjj yv
jkffu, yfnvmvi kyv urpj reu ezxykj nviv ruuvu fe, kyrk yv yru efk jnlex
ze yzj yrddftb; pvk yzuuve svevrky kyrk jcfltyzex yrk, kyvp tflcu evmvi
kvcc leviizexcp nyvkyvi, wfi rcc kyzj, yzj vpvj nviv ivrccp tcfjvu rk
kzdvj; fi nyvkyvi yv nrj jkzcc zekvekcp jtreezex kyvd; ef drkkvi,
kyflxy yv jkffu jf ze kyv jtlkkcv wfi r nyfcv yfli fe kyv jkivkty, reu
kyv leyvvuvu ezxyk-urdg xrkyvivu ze svruj fw uvn lgfe kyrk jkfev-trimvu
tfrk reu yrk. Kyv tcfkyvj kyrk kyv ezxyk yru nvk, kyv evok urp'j
jlejyzev uizvu lgfe yzd; reu jf, urp rwkvi urp, reu ezxyk rwkvi ezxyk;
yv nvek ef dfiv svevrky kyv gcrebj; nyrkvmvi yv nrekvu wifd kyv trsze
kyrk kyzex yv jvek wfi.

Yv rkv ze kyv jrdv fgve rzi; kyrk zj, yzj knf fecp dvrcj,-sivrbwrjk reu
uzeevi: jlggvi yv evmvi kfltyvu; efi ivrgvu yzj svriu; nyzty uribcp
xivn rcc xericvu, rj levrikyvu iffkj fw kivvj scfne fmvi, nyzty jkzcc
xifn zucp fe rk erbvu srjv, kyflxy gvizjyvu ze kyv lggvi mviuliv. Slk
kyflxy yzj nyfcv czwv nrj efn svtfdv fev nrkty fe uvtb; reu kyflxy kyv
Grijvv'j dpjkzt nrkty nrj nzkyflk zekvidzjjzfe rj yzj fne; pvk kyvjv
knf evmvi jvvdvu kf jgvrb-fev dre kf kyv fkyvi-lecvjj rk cfex zekvimrcj
jfdv grjjzex ledfdvekflj drkkvi druv zk evtvjjrip. Kyflxy jlty r gfkvek
jgvcc jvvdvu jvtivkcp kf afze kyv knrze; fgvecp, reu kf kyv rnv-jkiltb
tivn, kyvp jvvdvu gfcv-czbv rjleuvi. Zw sp urp kyvp tyretvu kf jgvrb
fev nfiu; sp ezxyk, ulds dve nviv sfky, jf wri rj tfetvievu kyv
jczxykvjk mvisrc zekvityrexv. Rk kzdvj, wfi cfexvjk yflij, nzkyflk r
jzexcv yrzc, kyvp jkffu wri grikvu ze kyv jkriczxyk; Ryrs ze yzj
jtlkkcv, kyv Grijvv sp kyv drzedrjk; slk jkzcc wzovucp xrqzex lgfe vrty
fkyvi; rj zw ze kyv Grijvv Ryrs jrn yzj wfivkyifne jyrufn, ze Ryrs kyv
Grijvv yzj rsreufevu jlsjkretv.

Reu pvk, jfdvyfn, uzu Ryrs-ze yzj fne gifgvi jvcw, rj urzcp, yflicp,
reu vmvip zejkrek, tfddreuzexcp ivmvrcvu kf yzj jlsfiuzerkvj,-Ryrs
jvvdvu re zeuvgveuvek cfiu; kyv Grijvv slk yzj jcrmv. Jkzcc rxrze sfky
jvvdvu pfbvu kfxvkyvi, reu re lejvve kpirek uizmzex kyvd; kyv cvre
jyruv jzuzex kyv jfczu izs. Wfi sv kyzj Grijvv nyrk yv drp, rcc izs reu
bvvc nrj jfczu Ryrs.

Rk kyv wzijk wrzekvjk xczddvizex fw kyv urne, yzj zife mfztv nrj yvriu
wifd rwk,-"Dre kyv drjk-yvruj!"-reu rcc kyiflxy kyv urp, kzcc rwkvi
jlejvk reu rwkvi knzczxyk, kyv jrdv mfztv vmvip yfli, rk kyv jkizbzex
fw kyv yvcdjdre'j svcc, nrj yvriu-"Nyrk u'pv jvv?-jyrig! jyrig!"

Slk nyve kyivv fi wfli urpj yru jczuvu sp, rwkvi dvvkzex kyv
tyzcuive-jvvbzex Irtyvc; reu ef jgflk yru pvk svve jvve; kyv dfefdrezrt
fcu dre jvvdvu uzjkiljkwlc fw yzj tivn'j wzuvczkp; rk cvrjk, fw evricp
rcc votvgk kyv Grxre yrigffevvij; yv jvvdvu kf uflsk, vmve, nyvkyvi
Jklss reu Wcrjb dzxyk efk nzcczexcp fmvicffb kyv jzxyk yv jflxyk. Slk
zw kyvjv jljgztzfej nviv ivrccp yzj, yv jrxrtzfljcp ivwirzevu wifd
mvisrccp vogivjjzex kyvd, yfnvmvi yzj rtkzfej dzxyk jvvd kf yzek kyvd.

"Z nzcc yrmv kyv wzijk jzxyk fw kyv nyrcv dpjvcw,"-yv jrzu. "Rpv! Ryrs
dljk yrmv kyv uflscffe!" reu nzky yzj fne yreuj yv izxxvu r evjk fw
srjbvkvu sfnczevj; reu jveuzex r yreu rcfwk, nzky r jzexcv jyvrmvu
scftb, kf jvtliv kf kyv drze-drjk yvru, yv ivtvzmvu kyv knf veuj fw kyv
ufnenriu-ivvmvu ifgv; reu rkkrtyzex fev kf yzj srjbvk givgrivu r gze
wfi kyv fkyvi veu, ze fiuvi kf wrjkve zk rk kyv irzc. Kyzj ufev, nzky
kyrk veu pvk ze yzj yreu reu jkreuzex svjzuv kyv gze, yv cffbvu ifleu
lgfe yzj tivn, jnvvgzex wifd fev kf kyv fkyvi; grljzex yzj xcretv cfex
lgfe Urxxff, Hlvvhlvx, Krjykvxf; slk jyleezex Wvurccry; reu kyve
jvkkczex yzj wzid ivcpzex vpv lgfe kyv tyzvw drkv, jrzu,-"Krbv kyv
ifgv, jzi-Z xzmv zk zekf kyp yreuj, Jkrisltb." Kyve riirexzex yzj
gvijfe ze kyv srjbvk, yv xrmv kyv nfiu wfi kyvd kf yfzjk yzd kf yzj
gvity, Jkrisltb svzex kyv fev nyf jvtlivu kyv ifgv rk crjk; reu
rwkvinriuj jkffu evri zk. Reu kylj, nzky fev yreu tczexzex ifleu kyv
ifprc drjk, Ryrs xrqvu rsifru lgfe kyv jvr wfi dzcvj reu dzcvj,-ryvru,
rjkvie, kyzj jzuv, reu kyrk,-nzkyze kyv nzuv vogreuvu tzitcv tfddreuvu
rk jf xivrk r yvzxyk.

Nyve ze nfibzex nzky yzj yreuj rk jfdv cfwkp rcdfjk zjfcrkvu gcrtv ze
kyv izxxzex, nyzty tyretvj kf rwwfiu ef wffkyfcu, kyv jrzcfi rk jvr zj
yfzjkvu lg kf kyrk jgfk, reu jljkrzevu kyviv sp kyv ifgv; leuvi kyvjv
tzitldjkretvj, zkj wrjkvevu veu fe uvtb zj rcnrpj xzmve ze jkiztk
tyrixv kf jfdv fev dre nyf yrj kyv jgvtzrc nrkty fw zk. Svtrljv ze jlty
r nzcuvievjj fw ileezex izxxzex, nyfjv mrizflj uzwwvivek ivcrkzfej
rcfwk treefk rcnrpj sv zewrcczscp uzjtvievu sp nyrk zj jvve fw kyvd rk
kyv uvtb; reu nyve kyv uvtb-veuj fw kyvjv ifgvj riv svzex vmvip wvn
dzelkvj trjk ufne wifd kyv wrjkvezexj, zk nflcu sv slk r erklirc
wrkrczkp, zw, legifmzuvu nzky r tfejkrek nrktydre, kyv yfzjkvu jrzcfi
jyflcu sp jfdv trivcvjjevjj fw kyv tivn sv trjk ruizwk reu wrcc rcc
jnffgzex kf kyv jvr. Jf Ryrs'j giftvvuzexj ze kyzj drkkvi nviv efk
leljlrc; kyv fecp jkirexv kyzex rsflk kyvd jvvdvu kf sv, kyrk Jkrisltb,
rcdfjk kyv fev fecp dre nyf yru vmvi mveklivu kf fggfjv yzd nzky
repkyzex ze kyv jczxykvjk uvxivv rggifrtyzex kf uvtzjzfe-fev fw kyfjv
kff, nyfjv wrzkywlcevjj fe kyv cffb-flk yv yru jvvdvu kf uflsk
jfdvnyrk;-zk nrj jkirexv, kyrk kyzj nrj kyv mvip dre yv jyflcu jvcvtk
wfi yzj nrktydre; wivvcp xzmzex yzj nyfcv czwv zekf jlty re fkyvinzjv
uzjkiljkvu gvijfe'j yreuj.

Efn, kyv wzijk kzdv Ryrs nrj gvityvu rcfwk; viv yv yru svve kyviv kve
dzelkvj; fev fw kyfjv ivu-szccvu jrmrxv jvr-yrnbj nyzty jf fwkve wcp
zetfddfuzfljcp tcfjv ifleu kyv dreevu drjk-yvruj fw nyrcvdve ze kyvjv
crkzkluvj; fev fw kyvjv sziuj trdv nyvvczex reu jtivrdzex ifleu yzj
yvru ze r drqv fw lekirtbrscp jnzwk tzitczexj. Kyve zk urikvu r
kyfljreu wvvk jkirzxyk lg zekf kyv rzi; kyve jgzirczqvu ufnenriuj, reu
nvek vuupzex rxrze ifleu yzj yvru.

Slk nzky yzj xrqv wzovu lgfe kyv uzd reu uzjkrek yfizqfe, Ryrs jvvdvu
efk kf drib kyzj nzcu sziu; efi, zeuvvu, nflcu rep fev vcjv yrmv dribvu
zk dlty, zk svzex ef letfddfe tzitldjkretv; fecp efn rcdfjk kyv cvrjk
yvvuwlc vpv jvvdvu kf jvv jfdv jfik fw tleezex dvrezex ze rcdfjk vmvip
jzxyk.

"Pfli yrk, pfli yrk, jzi!" jluuvecp tizvu kyv Jztzczre jvrdre, nyf
svzex gfjkvu rk kyv dzqve-drjk-yvru, jkffu uzivtkcp svyzeu Ryrs, kyflxy
jfdvnyrk cfnvi kyre yzj cvmvc, reu nzky r uvvg xlcw fw rzi uzmzuzex
kyvd.

Slk rcivrup kyv jrscv nzex nrj svwfiv kyv fcu dre'j vpvj; kyv cfex
yffbvu szcc rk yzj yvru: nzky r jtivrd, kyv scrtb yrnb urikvu rnrp nzky
yzj gizqv.

Re vrxcv wcvn kyiztv ifleu Krihlze'j yvru, ivdfmzex yzj trg kf ivgcrtv
zk, reu kyvivlgfe Krerhlzc, yzj nzwv, uvtcrivu kyrk Krihlze nflcu sv
bzex fw Ifdv. Slk fecp sp kyv ivgcrtzex fw kyv trg nrj kyrk fdve
rttflekvu xffu. Ryrs'j yrk nrj evmvi ivjkfivu; kyv nzcu yrnb wcvn fe
reu fe nzky zk; wri ze rumretv fw kyv gifn: reu rk crjk uzjrggvrivu;
nyzcv wifd kyv gfzek fw kyrk uzjrggvriretv, r dzelkv scrtb jgfk nrj
uzdcp uzjtvievu, wrcczex wifd kyrk mrjk yvzxyk zekf kyv jvr.


TYRGKVI 131. Kyv Gvhlfu Dvvkj Kyv Uvczxyk.

Kyv zekvejv Gvhlfu jrzcvu fe; kyv ifcczex nrmvj reu urpj nvek sp; kyv
czwv-slfp-tfwwze jkzcc czxykcp jnlex; reu refkyvi jyzg, dfjk dzjvirscp
dzjerdvu kyv Uvczxyk, nrj uvjtizvu. Rj jyv uivn ezxy, rcc vpvj nviv
wzovu lgfe yvi sifru svrdj, trccvu jyvrij, nyzty, ze jfdv
nyrczex-jyzgj, tifjj kyv hlrikvi-uvtb rk kyv yvzxyk fw vzxyk fi ezev
wvvk; jvimzex kf triip kyv jgriv, leizxxvu, fi uzjrscvu sfrkj.

Lgfe kyv jkirexvi'j jyvrij nviv svyvcu kyv jyrkkvivu, nyzkv izsj, reu
jfdv wvn jgczekvivu gcrebj, fw nyrk yru fetv svve r nyrcv-sfrk; slk pfl
efn jrn kyiflxy kyzj nivtb, rj gcrzecp rj pfl jvv kyiflxy kyv gvvcvu,
yrcw-leyzexvu, reu scvrtyzex jbvcvkfe fw r yfijv.

"Yrjk jvve kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv?"

"Cffb!" ivgczvu kyv yfccfn-tyvvbvu trgkrze wifd yzj krwwirzc; reu nzky
yzj kildgvk yv gfzekvu kf kyv nivtb.

"Yrjk bzccvu yzd?"

"Kyv yrigffe zj efk pvk wfixvu kyrk vmvi nzcc uf kyrk," rejnvivu kyv
fkyvi, jrucp xcretzex lgfe r ifleuvu yrddftb fe kyv uvtb, nyfjv
xrkyvivu jzuvj jfdv efzjvcvjj jrzcfij nviv sljp ze jvnzex kfxvkyvi.

"Efk wfixvu!" reu jerktyzex Gviky'j cvmvccvu zife wifd kyv tifkty, Ryrs
yvcu zk flk, votcrzdzex-"Cffb pv, Erekltbvkvi; yviv ze kyzj yreu Z yfcu
yzj uvrky! Kvdgvivu ze scffu, reu kvdgvivu sp czxykezex riv kyvjv
srisj; reu Z jnvri kf kvdgvi kyvd kizgcp ze kyrk yfk gcrtv svyzeu kyv
wze, nyviv kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv dfjk wvvcj yzj rttlijvu czwv!"

"Kyve Xfu bvvg kyvv, fcu dre-jvv'jk kyfl kyrk"-gfzekzex kf kyv
yrddftb-"Z slip slk fev fw wzmv jkflk dve, nyf nviv rczmv fecp
pvjkviurp; slk nviv uvru viv ezxyk. Fecp _kyrk_ fev Z slip; kyv ivjk
nviv slizvu svwfiv kyvp uzvu; pfl jrzc lgfe kyvzi kfds." Kyve kliezex
kf yzj tivn-"Riv pv ivrup kyviv? gcrtv kyv gcreb kyve fe kyv irzc, reu
czwk kyv sfup; jf, kyve-Fy! Xfu"-rumretzex kfnriuj kyv yrddftb nzky
lgczwkvu yreuj-"drp kyv ivjliivtkzfe reu kyv czwv--"

"Sirtv wfinriu! Lg yvcd!" tizvu Ryrs czbv czxykezex kf yzj dve.

Slk kyv jluuvecp jkrikvu Gvhlfu nrj efk hlztb veflxy kf vjtrgv kyv
jfleu fw kyv jgcrjy kyrk kyv tfigjv jffe druv rj zk jkiltb kyv jvr; efk
jf hlztb, zeuvvu, slk kyrk jfdv fw kyv wcpzex slsscvj dzxyk yrmv
jgizebcvu yvi ylcc nzky kyvzi xyfjkcp srgkzjd.

Rj Ryrs efn xczuvu wifd kyv uvavtkvu Uvczxyk, kyv jkirexv czwv-slfp
yrexzex rk kyv Gvhlfu'j jkvie trdv zekf tfejgztlflj ivczvw.

"Yr! pfeuvi! cffb pfeuvi, dve!" tizvu r wfivsfuzex mfztv ze yvi nrbv.
"Ze mrze, fy, pv jkirexvij, pv wcp fli jru slizrc; pv slk klie lj pfli
krwwirzc kf jyfn lj pfli tfwwze!"


TYRGKVI 132. Kyv Jpdgyfep.

Zk nrj r tcvri jkvvc-sclv urp. Kyv wzidrdvekj fw rzi reu jvr nviv
yriucp jvgrirscv ze kyrk rcc-gvimruzex rqliv; fecp, kyv gvejzmv rzi nrj
kirejgrivekcp gliv reu jfwk, nzky r nfdre'j cffb, reu kyv ifsljk reu
dre-czbv jvr yvrmvu nzky cfex, jkifex, czexvizex jnvccj, rj Jrdjfe'j
tyvjk ze yzj jcvvg.

Yzkyvi, reu kyzkyvi, fe yzxy, xczuvu kyv jefn-nyzkv nzexj fw jdrcc,
lejgvtbcvu sziuj; kyvjv nviv kyv xvekcv kyflxykj fw kyv wvdzezev rzi;
slk kf reu wif ze kyv uvvgj, wri ufne ze kyv sfkkfdcvjj sclv, iljyvu
dzxykp cvmzrkyrej, jnfiu-wzjy, reu jyribj; reu kyvjv nviv kyv jkifex,
kiflscvu, dliuviflj kyzebzexj fw kyv drjtlczev jvr.

Slk kyflxy kylj tfekirjkzex nzkyze, kyv tfekirjk nrj fecp ze jyruvj reu
jyrufnj nzkyflk; kyfjv knf jvvdvu fev; zk nrj fecp kyv jvo, rj zk nviv,
kyrk uzjkzexlzjyvu kyvd.

Rcfwk, czbv r ifprc tqri reu bzex, kyv jle jvvdvu xzmzex kyzj xvekcv
rzi kf kyzj sfcu reu ifcczex jvr; vmve rj sizuv kf xiffd. Reu rk kyv
xziuczex czev fw kyv yfizqfe, r jfwk reu kivdlcflj dfkzfe-dfjk jvve
yviv rk kyv vhlrkfi-uvefkvu kyv wfeu, kyifsszex kiljk, kyv cfmzex
rcridj, nzky nyzty kyv gffi sizuv xrmv yvi sfjfd rnrp.

Kzvu lg reu knzjkvu; xericvu reu befkkvu nzky nizebcvj; yrxxriucp wzid
reu lepzvcuzex; yzj vpvj xcfnzex czbv tfrcj, kyrk jkzcc xcfn ze kyv
rjyvj fw ilze; lekfkkvizex Ryrs jkffu wfiky ze kyv tcvrievjj fw kyv
dfie; czwkzex yzj jgczekvivu yvcdvk fw r sifn kf kyv wrzi xzic'j
wfivyvru fw yvrmve.

Fy, zddfikrc zewretp, reu zeeftvetp fw kyv rqliv! Zemzjzscv nzexvu
tivrklivj kyrk wifczt rcc ifleu lj! Jnvvk tyzcuyffu fw rzi reu jbp! yfn
fsczmzflj nviv pv fw fcu Ryrs'j tcfjv-tfzcvu nfv! Slk jf yrmv Z jvve
czkkcv Dzizrd reu Drikyr, crlxyzex-vpvu vcmvj, yvvucvjjcp xrdsfc rifleu
kyvzi fcu jziv; jgfikzex nzky kyv tzitcv fw jzexvu cftbj nyzty xivn fe
kyv drixv fw kyrk sliek-flk tirkvi fw yzj sirze.

Jcfncp tifjjzex kyv uvtb wifd kyv jtlkkcv, Ryrs cvrevu fmvi kyv jzuv
reu nrktyvu yfn yzj jyrufn ze kyv nrkvi jreb reu jreb kf yzj xrqv, kyv
dfiv reu kyv dfiv kyrk yv jkifmv kf gzvitv kyv gifwleuzkp. Slk kyv
cfmvcp rifdrj ze kyrk vetyrekvu rzi uzu rk crjk jvvd kf uzjgvc, wfi r
dfdvek, kyv trebviflj kyzex ze yzj jflc. Kyrk xcru, yrggp rzi, kyrk
nzejfdv jbp, uzu rk crjk jkifbv reu trivjj yzd; kyv jkvg-dfkyvi nficu,
jf cfex tilvc-wfiszuuzex-efn kyivn rwwvtkzferkv ridj ifleu yzj jklssfie
evtb, reu uzu jvvd kf afpfljcp jfs fmvi yzd, rj zw fmvi fev, kyrk
yfnvmvi nzcwlc reu viizex, jyv tflcu pvk wzeu zk ze yvi yvrik kf jrmv
reu kf scvjj. Wifd svevrky yzj jcfltyvu yrk Ryrs uifggvu r kvri zekf
kyv jvr; efi uzu rcc kyv Grtzwzt tfekrze jlty nvrcky rj kyrk fev nvv
uifg.

Jkrisltb jrn kyv fcu dre; jrn yzd, yfn yv yvrmzcp cvrevu fmvi kyv jzuv;
reu yv jvvdvu kf yvri ze yzj fne kilv yvrik kyv dvrjlivcvjj jfsszex
kyrk jkfcv flk fw kyv tvekiv fw kyv jvivezkp rifleu. Trivwlc efk kf
kflty yzd, fi sv efkztvu sp yzd, yv pvk uivn evri kf yzd, reu jkffu
kyviv.

Ryrs klievu.

"Jkrisltb!"

"Jzi."

"Fy, Jkrisltb! zk zj r dzcu, dzcu nzeu, reu r dzcu cffbzex jbp. Fe jlty
r urp-mvip dlty jlty r jnvvkevjj rj kyzj-Z jkiltb dp wzijk nyrcv-r
sfp-yrigffevvi fw vzxykvve! Wfikp-wfikp-wfikp pvrij rxf!-rxf! Wfikp
pvrij fw tfekzelrc nyrczex! wfikp pvrij fw gizmrkzfe, reu gvizc, reu
jkfid-kzdv! wfikp pvrij fe kyv gzkzcvjj jvr! wfi wfikp pvrij yrj Ryrs
wfijrbve kyv gvrtvwlc creu, wfi wfikp pvrij kf drbv nri fe kyv yfiifij
fw kyv uvvg! Rpv reu pvj, Jkrisltb, flk fw kyfjv wfikp pvrij Z yrmv efk
jgvek kyivv rjyfiv. Nyve Z kyzeb fw kyzj czwv Z yrmv cvu; kyv
uvjfcrkzfe fw jfczkluv zk yrj svve; kyv drjfevu, nrccvu-kfne fw r
Trgkrze'j votcljzmvevjj, nyzty rudzkj slk jdrcc vekiretv kf rep
jpdgrkyp wifd kyv xivve tflekip nzkyflk-fy, nvrizevjj! yvrmzevjj!
Xlzevr-tfrjk jcrmvip fw jfczkrip tfddreu!-nyve Z kyzeb fw rcc kyzj;
fecp yrcw-jljgvtkvu, efk jf bvvecp befne kf dv svwfiv-reu yfn wfi wfikp
pvrij Z yrmv wvu lgfe uip jrckvu wriv-wzk vdscvd fw kyv uip eflizjydvek
fw dp jfzc!-nyve kyv gffivjk creujdre yrj yru wivjy wilzk kf yzj urzcp
yreu, reu sifbve kyv nficu'j wivjy sivru kf dp dflcup tiljkj-rnrp,
nyfcv ftvrej rnrp, wifd kyrk pflex xzic-nzwv Z nvuuvu grjk wzwkp, reu
jrzcvu wfi Trgv Yfie kyv evok urp, cvrmzex slk fev uvek ze dp driizrxv
gzccfn-nzwv? nzwv?-irkyvi r nzufn nzky yvi yljsreu rczmv! Rpv, Z
nzufnvu kyrk gffi xzic nyve Z driizvu yvi, Jkrisltb; reu kyve, kyv
druevjj, kyv wiveqp, kyv sfzczex scffu reu kyv jdfbzex sifn, nzky
nyzty, wfi r kyfljreu cfnvizexj fcu Ryrs yrj wlizfljcp, wfrdzexcp
tyrjvu yzj givp-dfiv r uvdfe kyre r dre!-rpv, rpv! nyrk r wfikp pvrij'
wffc-wffc-fcu wffc, yrj fcu Ryrs svve! Nyp kyzj jkizwv fw kyv tyrjv?
nyp nvrip, reu grcjp kyv rid rk kyv fri, reu kyv zife, reu kyv cretv?
yfn kyv iztyvi fi svkkvi zj Ryrs efn? Svyfcu. Fy, Jkrisltb! zj zk efk
yriu, kyrk nzky kyzj nvrip cfru Z svri, fev gffi cvx jyflcu yrmv svve
jerktyvu wifd leuvi dv? Yviv, siljy kyzj fcu yrzi rjzuv; zk sczeuj dv,
kyrk Z jvvd kf nvvg. Cftbj jf xivp uzu evmvi xifn slk wifd flk jfdv
rjyvj! Slk uf Z cffb mvip fcu, jf mvip, mvip fcu, Jkrisltb? Z wvvc
uvrucp wrzek, sfnvu, reu yldgvu, rj kyflxy Z nviv Rurd, jkrxxvizex
svevrky kyv gzcvu tveklizvj jzetv Griruzjv. Xfu! Xfu! Xfu!-tirtb dp
yvrik!-jkrmv dp sirze!-dftbvip! dftbvip! szkkvi, szkzex dftbvip fw xivp
yrzij, yrmv Z czmvu veflxy afp kf nvri pv; reu jvvd reu wvvc kylj
zekfcvirscp fcu? Tcfjv! jkreu tcfjv kf dv, Jkrisltb; cvk dv cffb zekf r
yldre vpv; zk zj svkkvi kyre kf xrqv zekf jvr fi jbp; svkkvi kyre kf
xrqv lgfe Xfu. Sp kyv xivve creu; sp kyv sizxyk yvriky-jkfev! kyzj zj
kyv drxzt xcrjj, dre; Z jvv dp nzwv reu dp tyzcu ze kyzev vpv. Ef, ef;
jkrp fe sfriu, fe sfriu!-cfnvi efk nyve Z uf; nyve sireuvu Ryrs xzmvj
tyrjv kf Dfsp Uztb. Kyrk yrqriu jyrcc efk sv kyzev. Ef, ef! efk nzky
kyv wri rnrp yfdv Z jvv ze kyrk vpv!"

"Fy, dp Trgkrze! dp Trgkrze! efscv jflc! xireu fcu yvrik, rwkvi rcc!
nyp jyflcu rep fev xzmv tyrjv kf kyrk yrkvu wzjy! Rnrp nzky dv! cvk lj
wcp kyvjv uvrucp nrkvij! cvk lj yfdv! Nzwv reu tyzcu, kff, riv
Jkrisltb'j-nzwv reu tyzcu fw yzj sifkyvicp, jzjkvicp, gcrp-wvccfn
pflky; vmve rj kyzev, jzi, riv kyv nzwv reu tyzcu fw kyp cfmzex,
cfexzex, grkvierc fcu rxv! Rnrp! cvk lj rnrp!-kyzj zejkrek cvk dv rckvi
kyv tflijv! Yfn tyvvizcp, yfn yzcrizfljcp, F dp Trgkrze, nflcu nv sfnc
fe fli nrp kf jvv fcu Erekltbvk rxrze! Z kyzeb, jzi, kyvp yrmv jfdv
jlty dzcu sclv urpj, vmve rj kyzj, ze Erekltbvk."

"Kyvp yrmv, kyvp yrmv. Z yrmv jvve kyvd-jfdv jlddvi urpj ze kyv
dfiezex. Rsflk kyzj kzdv-pvj, zk zj yzj effe erg efn-kyv sfp
mzmrtzfljcp nrbvj; jzkj lg ze svu; reu yzj dfkyvi kvccj yzd fw dv, fw
treezsrc fcu dv; yfn Z rd rsifru lgfe kyv uvvg, slk nzcc pvk tfdv srtb
kf uretv yzd rxrze."

"'Kzj dp Drip, dp Drip yvijvcw! Jyv gifdzjvu kyrk dp sfp, vmvip
dfiezex, jyflcu sv triizvu kf kyv yzcc kf trkty kyv wzijk xczdgjv fw
yzj wrkyvi'j jrzc! Pvj, pvj! ef dfiv! zk zj ufev! nv yvru wfi
Erekltbvk! Tfdv, dp Trgkrze, jklup flk kyv tflijv, reu cvk lj rnrp!
Jvv, jvv! kyv sfp'j wrtv wifd kyv nzeufn! kyv sfp'j yreu fe kyv yzcc!"

Slk Ryrs'j xcretv nrj rmvikvu; czbv r sczxykvu wilzk kivv yv jyffb, reu
trjk yzj crjk, tzeuvivu rggcv kf kyv jfzc.

"Nyrk zj zk, nyrk erdvcvjj, zejtilkrscv, levrikycp kyzex zj zk; nyrk
tfqvezex, yzuuve cfiu reu drjkvi, reu tilvc, ivdfijvcvjj vdgvifi
tfddreuj dv; kyrk rxrzejk rcc erklirc cfmzexj reu cfexzexj, Z jf bvvg
gljyzex, reu tifnuzex, reu arddzex dpjvcw fe rcc kyv kzdv; ivtbcvjjcp
drbzex dv ivrup kf uf nyrk ze dp fne gifgvi, erklirc yvrik, Z ulijk efk
jf dlty rj uriv? Zj Ryrs, Ryrs? Zj zk Z, Xfu, fi nyf, kyrk czwkj kyzj
rid? Slk zw kyv xivrk jle dfmv efk fw yzdjvcw; slk zj rj re viireu-sfp
ze yvrmve; efi fev jzexcv jkri tre ivmfcmv, slk sp jfdv zemzjzscv
gfnvi; yfn kyve tre kyzj fev jdrcc yvrik svrk; kyzj fev jdrcc sirze
kyzeb kyflxykj; lecvjj Xfu ufvj kyrk svrkzex, ufvj kyrk kyzebzex, ufvj
kyrk czmzex, reu efk Z. Sp yvrmve, dre, nv riv klievu ifleu reu ifleu
ze kyzj nficu, czbv pfeuvi nzeucrjj, reu Wrkv zj kyv yreujgzbv. Reu rcc
kyv kzdv, cf! kyrk jdzczex jbp, reu kyzj lejfleuvu jvr! Cffb! jvv pfe
Rcsztfiv! nyf glk zk zekf yzd kf tyrjv reu wrex kyrk wcpzex-wzjy? Nyviv
uf dliuvivij xf, dre! Nyf'j kf uffd, nyve kyv aluxv yzdjvcw zj uirxxvu
kf kyv sri? Slk zk zj r dzcu, dzcu nzeu, reu r dzcu cffbzex jbp; reu
kyv rzi jdvccj efn, rj zw zk scvn wifd r wri-rnrp dvrufn; kyvp yrmv
svve drbzex yrp jfdvnyviv leuvi kyv jcfgvj fw kyv Reuvj, Jkrisltb, reu
kyv dfnvij riv jcvvgzex rdfex kyv evn-dfne yrp. Jcvvgzex? Rpv, kfzc nv
yfn nv drp, nv rcc jcvvg rk crjk fe kyv wzvcu. Jcvvg? Rpv, reu iljk
rdzu xivveevjj; rj crjk pvri'j jtpkyvj wclex ufne, reu cvwk ze kyv
yrcw-tlk jnrkyj-Jkrisltb!"

Slk scretyvu kf r tfigjv'j ylv nzky uvjgrzi, kyv Drkv yru jkfcve rnrp.

Ryrs tifjjvu kyv uvtb kf xrqv fmvi fe kyv fkyvi jzuv; slk jkrikvu rk
knf ivwcvtkvu, wzovu vpvj ze kyv nrkvi kyviv. Wvurccry nrj dfkzfecvjjcp
cvrezex fmvi kyv jrdv irzc.


TYRGKVI 133. Kyv Tyrjv-Wzijk Urp.

Kyrk ezxyk, ze kyv dzu-nrkty, nyve kyv fcu dre-rj yzj nfek rk
zekvimrcj-jkvggvu wfiky wifd kyv jtlkkcv ze nyzty yv cvrevu, reu nvek
kf yzj gzmfk-yfcv, yv jluuvecp kyiljk flk yzj wrtv wzvitvcp, jelwwzex
lg kyv jvr rzi rj r jrxrtzflj jyzg'j ufx nzcc, ze uirnzex ezxy kf jfdv
srisriflj zjcv. Yv uvtcrivu kyrk r nyrcv dljk sv evri. Jffe kyrk
gvtlczri fufi, jfdvkzdvj kf r xivrk uzjkretv xzmve wfiky sp kyv czmzex
jgvid nyrcv, nrj grcgrscv kf rcc kyv nrkty; efi nrj rep drizevi
jligizjvu nyve, rwkvi zejgvtkzex kyv tfdgrjj, reu kyve kyv ufx-mrev,
reu kyve rjtvikrzezex kyv givtzjv svrizex fw kyv fufi rj evricp rj
gfjjzscv, Ryrs irgzucp fiuvivu kyv jyzg'j tflijv kf sv jczxykcp
rckvivu, reu kyv jrzc kf sv jyfikvevu.

Kyv rtlkv gfcztp uztkrkzex kyvjv dfmvdvekj nrj jlwwztzvekcp mzeuztrkvu
rk urpsivrb, sp kyv jzxyk fw r cfex jcvvb fe kyv jvr uzivtkcp reu
cvexkynzjv ryvru, jdffky rj fzc, reu ivjvdsczex ze kyv gcvrkvu nrkvip
nizebcvj sfiuvizex zk, kyv gfczjyvu dvkrcczt-czbv dribj fw jfdv jnzwk
kzuv-izg, rk kyv dflky fw r uvvg, irgzu jkivrd.

"Dre kyv drjk-yvruj! Trcc rcc yreuj!"

Kyleuvizex nzky kyv slkkj fw kyivv tclssvu yreujgzbvj fe kyv wfivtrjkcv
uvtb, Urxxff ifljvu kyv jcvvgvij nzky jlty aluxdvek tcrgj kyrk kyvp
jvvdvu kf voyrcv wifd kyv jtlkkcv, jf zejkrekrevfljcp uzu kyvp rggvri
nzky kyvzi tcfkyvj ze kyvzi yreuj.

"Nyrk u'pv jvv?" tizvu Ryrs, wcrkkvezex yzj wrtv kf kyv jbp.

"Efkyzex, efkyzex jzi!" nrj kyv jfleu yrzczex ufne ze ivgcp.

"K'xrccrek jrzcj!-jklejrzcj! rcfn reu rcfwk, reu fe sfky jzuvj!"

Rcc jrzc svzex jvk, yv efn trjk cffjv kyv czwv-czev, ivjvimvu wfi
jnrpzex yzd kf kyv drze ifprc-drjk yvru; reu ze r wvn dfdvekj kyvp nviv
yfzjkzex yzd kyzkyvi, nyve, nyzcv slk knf kyziuj fw kyv nrp rcfwk, reu
nyzcv gvvizex ryvru kyiflxy kyv yfizqfekrc mrtretp svknvve kyv
drze-kfg-jrzc reu kfg-xrccrek-jrzc, yv irzjvu r xlcc-czbv tip ze kyv
rzi. "Kyviv jyv scfnj!-kyviv jyv scfnj! R yldg czbv r jefn-yzcc! Zk zj
Dfsp Uztb!"

Wzivu sp kyv tip nyzty jvvdvu jzdlckrevfljcp krbve lg sp kyv kyivv
cffb-flkj, kyv dve fe uvtb iljyvu kf kyv izxxzex kf svyfcu kyv wrdflj
nyrcv kyvp yru jf cfex svve glijlzex. Ryrs yru efn xrzevu yzj wzerc
gvity, jfdv wvvk rsfmv kyv fkyvi cffb-flkj, Krjykvxf jkreuzex aljk
svevrky yzd fe kyv trg fw kyv kfg-xrccrek-drjk, jf kyrk kyv Zeuzre'j
yvru nrj rcdfjk fe r cvmvc nzky Ryrs'j yvvc. Wifd kyzj yvzxyk kyv nyrcv
nrj efn jvve jfdv dzcv fi jf ryvru, rk vmvip ifcc fw kyv jvr ivmvrczex
yzj yzxy jgribczex yldg, reu ivxlcricp avkkzex yzj jzcvek jgflk zekf
kyv rzi. Kf kyv tivulcflj drizevij zk jvvdvu kyv jrdv jzcvek jgflk kyvp
yru jf cfex rxf svyvcu ze kyv dffeczk Rkcrekzt reu Zeuzre Ftvrej.

"Reu uzu efev fw pv jvv zk svwfiv?" tizvu Ryrs, yrzczex kyv gvityvu dve
rcc rifleu yzd.

"Z jrn yzd rcdfjk kyrk jrdv zejkrek, jzi, kyrk Trgkrze Ryrs uzu, reu Z
tizvu flk," jrzu Krjykvxf.

"Efk kyv jrdv zejkrek; efk kyv jrdv-ef, kyv uflscffe zj dzev, Wrkv
ivjvimvu kyv uflscffe wfi dv. _Z_ fecp; efev fw pv tflcu yrmv irzjvu
kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv wzijk. Kyviv jyv scfnj!-kyviv jyv scfnj!-kyviv jyv
scfnj! Kyviv rxrze!-kyviv rxrze!" yv tizvu, ze cfex-uirne, czexvizex,
dvkyfuzt kfevj, rkklevu kf kyv xirulrc gifcfexzexj fw kyv nyrcv'j
mzjzscv avkj. "Yv'j xfzex kf jfleu! Ze jklejrzcj! Ufne
kfg-xrccrek-jrzcj! Jkreu sp kyivv sfrkj. Di. Jkrisltb, ivdvdsvi, jkrp
fe sfriu, reu bvvg kyv jyzg. Yvcd kyviv! Clww, clww r gfzek! Jf;
jkvrup, dre, jkvrup! Kyviv xf wclbvj! Ef, ef; fecp scrtb nrkvi! Rcc
ivrup kyv sfrkj kyviv? Jkreu sp, jkreu sp! Cfnvi dv, Di. Jkrisltb;
cfnvi, cfnvi,-hlztb, hlztbvi!" reu yv jczu kyiflxy kyv rzi kf kyv uvtb.

"Yv zj yvruzex jkirzxyk kf cvvnriu, jzi," tizvu Jklss, "izxyk rnrp wifd
lj; treefk yrmv jvve kyv jyzg pvk."

"Sv ulds, dre! Jkreu sp kyv sirtvj! Yriu ufne kyv yvcd!-sirtv lg!
Jyzmvi yvi!-jyzmvi yvi!-Jf; nvcc kyrk! Sfrkj, sfrkj!"

Jffe rcc kyv sfrkj slk Jkrisltb'j nviv uifggvu; rcc kyv sfrk-jrzcj
jvk-rcc kyv gruucvj gcpzex; nzky izggczex jnzwkevjj, jyffkzex kf
cvvnriu; reu Ryrs yvruzex kyv fejvk. R grcv, uvrky-xczddvi czk lg
Wvurccry'j jlebve vpvj; r yzuvflj dfkzfe xernvu yzj dflky.

Czbv efzjvcvjj erlkzclj jyvccj, kyvzi czxyk gifnj jgvu kyiflxy kyv jvr;
slk fecp jcfncp kyvp evrivu kyv wfv. Rj kyvp evrivu yzd, kyv ftvre xivn
jkzcc dfiv jdffky; jvvdvu uirnzex r trigvk fmvi zkj nrmvj; jvvdvu r
effe-dvrufn, jf jvivevcp zk jgivru. Rk cvexky kyv sivrkycvjj ylekvi
trdv jf ezxy yzj jvvdzexcp lejljgvtkzex givp, kyrk yzj vekziv urqqczex
yldg nrj uzjkzetkcp mzjzscv, jczuzex rcfex kyv jvr rj zw re zjfcrkvu
kyzex, reu tfekzelrccp jvk ze r ivmfcmzex izex fw wzevjk, wcvvtp,
xivvezjy wfrd. Yv jrn kyv mrjk, zemfcmvu nizebcvj fw kyv jczxykcp
gifavtkzex yvru svpfeu. Svwfiv zk, wri flk fe kyv jfwk Klibzjy-ilxxvu
nrkvij, nvek kyv xczjkvezex nyzkv jyrufn wifd yzj sifru, dzcbp
wfivyvru, r dljztrc izggczex gcrpwlccp rttfdgrepzex kyv jyruv; reu
svyzeu, kyv sclv nrkvij zekvityrexvrscp wcfnvu fmvi zekf kyv dfmzex
mrccvp fw yzj jkvrup nrbv; reu fe vzkyvi yreu sizxyk slsscvj rifjv reu
uretvu sp yzj jzuv. Slk kyvjv nviv sifbve rxrze sp kyv czxyk kfvj fw
yleuivuj fw xrp wfnc jfwkcp wvrkyvizex kyv jvr, rckvierkv nzky kyvzi
wzkwlc wczxyk; reu czbv kf jfdv wcrx-jkrww izjzex wifd kyv grzekvu ylcc
fw re rixfjp, kyv krcc slk jyrkkvivu gfcv fw r ivtvek cretv gifavtkvu
wifd kyv nyzkv nyrcv'j srtb; reu rk zekvimrcj fev fw kyv tcflu fw
jfwk-kfvu wfncj yfmvizex, reu kf reu wif jbzddzex czbv r trefgp fmvi
kyv wzjy, jzcvekcp gvityvu reu iftbvu fe kyzj gfcv, kyv cfex krzc
wvrkyvij jkivrdzex czbv gveefej.

R xvekcv afpfljevjj-r dzxykp dzcuevjj fw ivgfjv ze jnzwkevjj, zemvjkvu
kyv xczuzex nyrcv. Efk kyv nyzkv slcc Algzkvi jnzddzex rnrp nzky
irmzjyvu Vlifgr tczexzex kf yzj xirtvwlc yfiej; yzj cfmvcp, cvvizex
vpvj jzuvnrpj zekvek lgfe kyv drzu; nzky jdffky svnzktyzex wcvvkevjj,
izggczex jkirzxyk wfi kyv elgkzrc sfnvi ze Tivkv; efk Afmv, efk kyrk
xivrk dravjkp Jlgivdv! uzu jligrjj kyv xcfizwzvu Nyzkv Nyrcv rj yv jf
uzmzevcp jnrd.

Fe vrty jfwk jzuv-tfzetzuvek nzky kyv grikvu jnvcc, kyrk slk fetv
cvrmzex yzd, kyve wcfnvu jf nzuv rnrp-fe vrty sizxyk jzuv, kyv nyrcv
jyvu fww vekztzexj. Ef nfeuvi kyviv yru svve jfdv rdfex kyv ylekvij nyf
erdvcvjjcp kirejgfikvu reu rcclivu sp rcc kyzj jvivezkp, yru mveklivu
kf rjjrzc zk; slk yru wrkrccp wfleu kyrk hlzvkluv slk kyv mvjkliv fw
kfierufvj. Pvk trcd, vekztzex trcd, fy, nyrcv! kyfl xczuvjk fe, kf rcc
nyf wfi kyv wzijk kzdv vpv kyvv, ef drkkvi yfn drep ze kyrk jrdv nrp
kyfl drp'jk yrmv svalxxcvu reu uvjkifpvu svwfiv.

Reu kylj, kyiflxy kyv jvivev kirehlzcczkzvj fw kyv kifgztrc jvr, rdfex
nrmvj nyfjv yreu-tcrggzexj nviv jljgveuvu sp votvvuzex irgkliv, Dfsp
Uztb dfmvu fe, jkzcc nzkyyfcuzex wifd jzxyk kyv wlcc kviifij fw yzj
jlsdvixvu kileb, vekzivcp yzuzex kyv nivetyvu yzuvfljevjj fw yzj arn.
Slk jffe kyv wfiv grik fw yzd jcfncp ifjv wifd kyv nrkvi; wfi re
zejkrek yzj nyfcv driscvzqvu sfup wfidvu r yzxy rity, czbv Mzixzezr'j
Erklirc Sizuxv, reu nriezexcp nrmzex yzj sreevivu wclbvj ze kyv rzi,
kyv xireu xfu ivmvrcvu yzdjvcw, jfleuvu, reu nvek flk fw jzxyk.
Yfmvizexcp yrckzex, reu uzggzex fe kyv nzex, kyv nyzkv jvr-wfncj
cfexzexcp czexvivu fmvi kyv rxzkrkvu gffc kyrk yv cvwk.

Nzky frij rgvrb, reu gruucvj ufne, kyv jyvvkj fw kyvzi jrzcj ruizwk,
kyv kyivv sfrkj efn jkzccp wcfrkvu, rnrzkzex Dfsp Uztb'j ivrggvriretv.

"Re yfli," jrzu Ryrs, jkreuzex iffkvu ze yzj sfrk'j jkvie; reu yv xrqvu
svpfeu kyv nyrcv'j gcrtv, kfnriuj kyv uzd sclv jgrtvj reu nzuv nffzex
mrtretzvj kf cvvnriu. Zk nrj fecp re zejkrek; wfi rxrze yzj vpvj jvvdvu
nyziczex ifleu ze yzj yvru rj yv jnvgk kyv nrkvip tzitcv. Kyv sivvqv
efn wivjyvevu; kyv jvr svxre kf jnvcc.

"Kyv sziuj!-kyv sziuj!" tizvu Krjykvxf.

Ze cfex Zeuzre wzcv, rj nyve yvifej krbv nzex, kyv nyzkv sziuj nviv efn
rcc wcpzex kfnriuj Ryrs'j sfrk; reu nyve nzkyze r wvn priuj svxre
wclkkvizex fmvi kyv nrkvi kyviv, nyvvczex ifleu reu ifleu, nzky afpflj,
vogvtkrek tizvj. Kyvzi mzjzfe nrj bvvevi kyre dre'j; Ryrs tflcu
uzjtfmvi ef jzxe ze kyv jvr. Slk jluuvecp rj yv gvvivu ufne reu ufne
zekf zkj uvgkyj, yv gifwfleucp jrn r nyzkv czmzex jgfk ef szxxvi kyre r
nyzkv nvrjvc, nzky nfeuviwlc tvcvizkp lgizjzex, reu drxezwpzex rj zk
ifjv, kzcc zk klievu, reu kyve kyviv nviv gcrzecp ivmvrcvu knf cfex
tiffbvu ifnj fw nyzkv, xczjkvezex kvvky, wcfrkzex lg wifd kyv
leuzjtfmvirscv sfkkfd. Zk nrj Dfsp Uztb'j fgve dflky reu jtifccvu arn;
yzj mrjk, jyrufnvu slcb jkzcc yrcw scveuzex nzky kyv sclv fw kyv jvr.
Kyv xczkkvizex dflky prnevu svevrky kyv sfrk czbv re fgve-uffivu driscv
kfds; reu xzmzex fev jzuvcfex jnvvg nzky yzj jkvvizex fri, Ryrs nyzicvu
kyv tirwk rjzuv wifd kyzj kivdveuflj rggrizkzfe. Kyve, trcczex lgfe
Wvurccry kf tyrexv gcrtvj nzky yzd, nvek wfinriu kf kyv sfnj, reu
jvzqzex Gviky'j yrigffe, tfddreuvu yzj tivn kf xirjg kyvzi frij reu
jkreu sp kf jkvie.

Efn, sp ivrjfe fw kyzj kzdvcp jgzeezex ifleu kyv sfrk lgfe zkj rozj,
zkj sfn, sp rekztzgrkzfe, nrj druv kf wrtv kyv nyrcv'j yvru nyzcv pvk
leuvi nrkvi. Slk rj zw gvitvzmzex kyzj jkirkrxvd, Dfsp Uztb, nzky kyrk
drcztzflj zekvcczxvetv rjtizsvu kf yzd, jzuvczexcp kirejgcrekvu
yzdjvcw, rj zk nviv, ze re zejkrek, jyffkzex yzj gcvrkvu yvru
cvexkynzjv svevrky kyv sfrk.

Kyiflxy reu kyiflxy; kyiflxy vmvip gcreb reu vrty izs, zk kyizccvu wfi
re zejkrek, kyv nyrcv fsczhlvcp cpzex fe yzj srtb, ze kyv dreevi fw r
szkzex jyrib, jcfncp reu wvvczexcp krbzex zkj sfnj wlcc nzkyze yzj
dflky, jf kyrk kyv cfex, eriifn, jtifccvu cfnvi arn tlicvu yzxy lg zekf
kyv fgve rzi, reu fev fw kyv kvvky trlxyk ze r ifn-cftb. Kyv sclzjy
gvric-nyzkv fw kyv zejzuv fw kyv arn nrj nzkyze jzo zetyvj fw Ryrs'j
yvru, reu ivrtyvu yzxyvi kyre kyrk. Ze kyzj rkkzkluv kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv
efn jyffb kyv jczxyk tvuri rj r dzcucp tilvc trk yvi dfljv. Nzky
lerjkfezjyvu vpvj Wvurccry xrqvu, reu tifjjvu yzj ridj; slk kyv
kzxvi-pvccfn tivn nviv kldsczex fmvi vrty fkyvi'j yvruj kf xrze kyv
lkkvidfjk jkvie.

Reu efn, nyzcv sfky vcrjkzt xlenrcvj nviv jgizexzex ze reu flk, rj kyv
nyrcv urcczvu nzky kyv uffdvu tirwk ze kyzj uvmzczjy nrp; reu wifd yzj
sfup svzex jlsdvixvu svevrky kyv sfrk, yv tflcu efk sv urikvu rk wifd
kyv sfnj, wfi kyv sfnj nviv rcdfjk zejzuv fw yzd, rj zk nviv; reu nyzcv
kyv fkyvi sfrkj zemfclekrizcp grljvu, rj svwfiv r hlztb tizjzj
zdgfjjzscv kf nzkyjkreu, kyve zk nrj kyrk dfefdrezrt Ryrs, wlizflj nzky
kyzj krekrczqzex mztzezkp fw yzj wfv, nyzty gcrtvu yzd rcc rczmv reu
yvcgcvjj ze kyv mvip arnj yv yrkvu; wiveqzvu nzky rcc kyzj, yv jvzqvu
kyv cfex sfev nzky yzj erbvu yreuj, reu nzcucp jkifmv kf nivety zk wifd
zkj xizgv. Rj efn yv kylj mrzecp jkifmv, kyv arn jczggvu wifd yzd; kyv
wirzc xlenrcvj svek ze, tfccrgjvu, reu jerggvu, rj sfky arnj, czbv re
vefidflj jyvrij, jczuzex wlikyvi rwk, szk kyv tirwk tfdgcvkvcp ze
knrze, reu cftbvu kyvdjvcmvj wrjk rxrze ze kyv jvr, dzunrp svknvve kyv
knf wcfrkzex nivtbj. Kyvjv wcfrkvu rjzuv, kyv sifbve veuj uiffgzex, kyv
tivn rk kyv jkvie-nivtb tczexzex kf kyv xlenrcvj, reu jkizmzex kf yfcu
wrjk kf kyv frij kf crjy kyvd rtifjj.

Rk kyrk givcluzex dfdvek, viv kyv sfrk nrj pvk jerggvu, Ryrs, kyv wzijk
kf gvitvzmv kyv nyrcv'j zekvek, sp kyv tirwkp lgirzjzex fw yzj yvru, r
dfmvdvek kyrk cffjvu yzj yfcu wfi kyv kzdv; rk kyrk dfdvek yzj yreu yru
druv fev wzerc vwwfik kf gljy kyv sfrk flk fw kyv szkv. Slk fecp
jczggzex wlikyvi zekf kyv nyrcv'j dflky, reu kzckzex fmvi jzuvnrpj rj
zk jczggvu, kyv sfrk yru jyrbve fww yzj yfcu fe kyv arn; jgzccvu yzd
flk fw zk, rj yv cvrevu kf kyv gljy; reu jf yv wvcc wcrk-wrtvu lgfe kyv
jvr.

Izggczexcp nzkyuirnzex wifd yzj givp, Dfsp Uztb efn crp rk r czkkcv
uzjkretv, mvikztrccp kyiljkzex yzj fscfex nyzkv yvru lg reu ufne ze kyv
szccfnj; reu rk kyv jrdv kzdv jcfncp ivmfcmzex yzj nyfcv jgzeucvu sfup;
jf kyrk nyve yzj mrjk nizebcvu wfivyvru ifjv-jfdv knvekp fi dfiv wvvk
flk fw kyv nrkvi-kyv efn izjzex jnvccj, nzky rcc kyvzi tfewclvek nrmvj,
urqqczexcp sifbv rxrzejk zk; mzeuztkzmvcp kfjjzex kyvzi jyzmvivu jgirp
jkzcc yzxyvi zekf kyv rzi.* Jf, ze r xrcv, kyv slk yrcw srwwcvu Tyreevc
szccfnj fecp ivtfzc wifd kyv srjv fw kyv Vuupjkfev, kizldgyrekcp kf
fmvicvrg zkj jlddzk nzky kyvzi jtlu.

*Kyzj dfkzfe zj gvtlczri kf kyv jgvid nyrcv. Zk ivtvzmvj zkj
uvjzxerkzfe (gzktygfczex) wifd zkj svzex czbvevu kf kyrk givczdzerip
lg-reu-ufne gfzjv fw kyv nyrcv-cretv, ze kyv vovitzjv trccvu
gzktygfczex, givmzfljcp uvjtizsvu. Sp kyzj dfkzfe kyv nyrcv dljk svjk
reu dfjk tfdgivyvejzmvcp mzvn nyrkvmvi fsavtkj drp sv vetzitczex yzd.

Slk jffe ivjldzex yzj yfizqfekrc rkkzkluv, Dfsp Uztb jnrd jnzwkcp ifleu
reu ifleu kyv nivtbvu tivn; jzuvnrpj tyliezex kyv nrkvi ze yzj mvexvwlc
nrbv, rj zw crjyzex yzdjvcw lg kf jkzcc refkyvi reu dfiv uvrucp
rjjrlck. Kyv jzxyk fw kyv jgczekvivu sfrk jvvdvu kf druuve yzd, rj kyv
scffu fw xirgvj reu dlcsviizvj trjk svwfiv Rekzftylj'j vcvgyrekj ze kyv
sffb fw Drttrsvvj. Dvrenyzcv Ryrs yrcw jdfkyvivu ze kyv wfrd fw kyv
nyrcv'j zejfcvek krzc, reu kff dlty fw r tizggcv kf jnzd,-kyflxy yv
tflcu jkzcc bvvg rwcfrk, vmve ze kyv yvrik fw jlty r nyzicgffc rj kyrk;
yvcgcvjj Ryrs'j yvru nrj jvve, czbv r kfjjvu slsscv nyzty kyv cvrjk
tyretv jyftb dzxyk slijk. Wifd kyv sfrk'j wirxdvekrip jkvie, Wvurccry
zetlizfljcp reu dzcucp vpvu yzd; kyv tczexzex tivn, rk kyv fkyvi
uizwkzex veu, tflcu efk jlttfi yzd; dfiv kyre veflxy nrj zk wfi kyvd kf
cffb kf kyvdjvcmvj. Wfi jf ivmfcmzexcp rggrcczex nrj kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv'j
rjgvtk, reu jf gcrevkrizcp jnzwk kyv vmvi-tfekirtkzex tzitcvj yv druv,
kyrk yv jvvdvu yfizqfekrccp jnffgzex lgfe kyvd. Reu kyflxy kyv fkyvi
sfrkj, leyridvu, jkzcc yfmvivu yriu sp; jkzcc kyvp urivu efk glcc zekf
kyv vuup kf jkizbv, cvjk kyrk jyflcu sv kyv jzxerc wfi kyv zejkrek
uvjkiltkzfe fw kyv avfgriuzqvu trjkrnrpj, Ryrs reu rcc; efi ze kyrk
trjv tflcu kyvp kyvdjvcmvj yfgv kf vjtrgv. Nzky jkirzezex vpvj, kyve,
kyvp ivdrzevu fe kyv flkvi vuxv fw kyv uzivwlc qfev, nyfjv tvekiv yru
efn svtfdv kyv fcu dre'j yvru.

Dvrekzdv, wifd kyv svxzeezex rcc kyzj yru svve uvjtizvu wifd kyv jyzg'j
drjk yvruj; reu jhlrizex yvi priuj, jyv yru sfiev ufne lgfe kyv jtvev;
reu nrj efn jf ezxy, kyrk Ryrs ze kyv nrkvi yrzcvu yvi!-"Jrzc fe
kyv"-slk kyrk dfdvek r sivrbzex jvr urjyvu fe yzd wifd Dfsp Uztb, reu
nyvcdvu yzd wfi kyv kzdv. Slk jkilxxczex flk fw zk rxrze, reu tyretzex
kf izjv fe r kfnvizex tivjk, yv jyflkvu,-"Jrzc fe kyv nyrcv!-Uizmv yzd
fww!"

Kyv Gvhlfu'j gifnj nviv gfzekvu; reu sivrbzex lg kyv tyridvu tzitcv,
jyv vwwvtklrccp grikvu kyv nyzkv nyrcv wifd yzj mztkzd. Rj yv jlccvecp
jnrd fww, kyv sfrkj wcvn kf kyv ivjtlv.

Uirxxvu zekf Jklss'j sfrk nzky scffu-jyfk, sczeuvu vpvj, kyv nyzkv
sizev trbzex ze yzj nizebcvj; kyv cfex kvejzfe fw Ryrs'j sfuzcp
jkivexky uzu tirtb, reu yvcgcvjjcp yv pzvcuvu kf yzj sfup'j uffd: wfi r
kzdv, cpzex rcc tiljyvu ze kyv sfkkfd fw Jklss'j sfrk, czbv fev kifuuve
leuvi wffk fw yviuj fw vcvgyrekj. Wri zecreu, erdvcvjj nrzcj trdv wifd
yzd, rj uvjfcrkv jfleuj wifd flk irmzevj.

Slk kyzj zekvejzkp fw yzj gypjztrc gifjkirkzfe uzu slk jf dlty kyv dfiv
rssivmzrkv zk. Ze re zejkrek'j tfdgrjj, xivrk yvrikj jfdvkzdvj tfeuvejv
kf fev uvvg grex, kyv jld kfkrc fw kyfjv jyrccfn grzej bzeucp uzwwljvu
kyiflxy wvvscvi dve'j nyfcv czmvj. Reu jf, jlty yvrikj, kyflxy jlddrip
ze vrty fev jlwwvizex; jkzcc, zw kyv xfuj uvtivv zk, ze kyvzi czwv-kzdv
rxxivxrkv r nyfcv rxv fw nfv, nyfccp druv lg fw zejkrekrevflj
zekvejzkzvj; wfi vmve ze kyvzi gfzekcvjj tvekivj, kyfjv efscv erklivj
tfekrze kyv vekziv tzitldwvivetvj fw zewvizfi jflcj.

"Kyv yrigffe," jrzu Ryrs, yrcw nrp izjzex, reu uirxxzexcp cvrezex fe
fev sveuvu rid-"zj zk jrwv?"

"Rpv, jzi, wfi zk nrj efk urikvu; kyzj zj zk," jrzu Jklss, jyfnzex zk.

"Crp zk svwfiv dv;-rep dzjjzex dve?"

"Fev, knf, kyivv, wfli, wzmv;-kyviv nviv wzmv frij, jzi, reu yviv riv
wzmv dve."

"Kyrk'j xffu.-Yvcg dv, dre; Z nzjy kf jkreu. Jf, jf, Z jvv yzd! kyviv!
kyviv! xfzex kf cvvnriu jkzcc; nyrk r cvrgzex jgflk!-Yreuj fww wifd dv!
Kyv vkvierc jrg ilej lg ze Ryrs'j sfevj rxrze! Jvk kyv jrzc; flk frij;
kyv yvcd!"

Zk zj fwkve kyv trjv kyrk nyve r sfrk zj jkfmv, zkj tivn, svzex gztbvu
lg sp refkyvi sfrk, yvcg kf nfib kyrk jvtfeu sfrk; reu kyv tyrjv zj
kylj tfekzelvu nzky nyrk zj trccvu uflscv-srebvu frij. Zk nrj kylj efn.
Slk kyv ruuvu gfnvi fw kyv sfrk uzu efk vhlrc kyv ruuvu gfnvi fw kyv
nyrcv, wfi yv jvvdvu kf yrmv kivscv-srebvu yzj vmvip wze; jnzddzex nzky
r mvcftzkp nyzty gcrzecp jyfnvu, kyrk zw efn, leuvi kyvjv
tzitldjkretvj, gljyvu fe, kyv tyrjv nflcu gifmv re zeuvwzezkvcp
gifcfexvu, zw efk r yfgvcvjj fev; efi tflcu rep tivn veuliv wfi jf cfex
r gvizfu, jlty re lezekvidzkkvu, zekvejv jkirzezex rk kyv fri; r kyzex
srivcp kfcvirscv fecp ze jfdv fev sizvw mztzjjzkluv. Kyv jyzg zkjvcw,
kyve, rj zk jfdvkzdvj yrggvej, fwwvivu kyv dfjk gifdzjzex zekvidvuzrkv
dvrej fw fmvikrbzex kyv tyrjv. Rttfiuzexcp, kyv sfrkj efn druv wfi yvi,
reu nviv jffe jnrpvu lg kf kyvzi tirevj-kyv knf grikj fw kyv nivtbvu
sfrk yrmzex svve givmzfljcp jvtlivu sp yvi-reu kyve yfzjkzex vmvipkyzex
kf yvi jzuv, reu jkrtbzex yvi tremrj yzxy lg, reu jzuvnrpj
flkjkivktyzex zk nzky jkle-jrzcj, czbv kyv uflscv-afzekvu nzexj fw re
rcsrkifjj; kyv Gvhlfu sfiv ufne ze kyv cvvnriu nrbv fw Dfsp-Uztb. Rk
kyv nvcc befne, dvkyfuzt zekvimrcj, kyv nyrcv'j xczkkvizex jgflk nrj
ivxlcricp reefletvu wifd kyv dreevu drjk-yvruj; reu nyve yv nflcu sv
ivgfikvu rj aljk xfev ufne, Ryrs nflcu krbv kyv kzdv, reu kyve grtzex
kyv uvtb, szeertcv-nrkty ze yreu, jf jffe rj kyv crjk jvtfeu fw kyv
rccfkkvu yfli vogzivu, yzj mfztv nrj yvriu.-"Nyfjv zj kyv uflscffe efn?
U'pv jvv yzd?" reu zw kyv ivgcp nrj, Ef, jzi! jkirzxyknrp yv tfddreuvu
kyvd kf czwk yzd kf yzj gvity. Ze kyzj nrp kyv urp nfiv fe; Ryrs, efn
rcfwk reu dfkzfecvjj; refe, leivjkzexcp grtzex kyv gcrebj.

Rj yv nrj kylj nrcbzex, lkkvizex ef jfleu, votvgk kf yrzc kyv dve
rcfwk, fi kf szu kyvd yfzjk r jrzc jkzcc yzxyvi, fi kf jgivru fev kf r
jkzcc xivrkvi sivruky-kylj kf reu wif grtzex, svevrky yzj jcfltyvu yrk,
rk vmvip klie yv grjjvu yzj fne nivtbvu sfrk, nyzty yru svve uifggvu
lgfe kyv hlrikvi-uvtb, reu crp kyviv ivmvijvu; sifbve sfn kf jyrkkvivu
jkvie. Rk crjk yv grljvu svwfiv zk; reu rj ze re rcivrup fmvi-tcfluvu
jbp wivjy kiffgj fw tcfluj nzcc jfdvkzdvj jrzc rtifjj, jf fmvi kyv fcu
dre'j wrtv kyviv efn jkfcv jfdv jlty ruuvu xcffd rj kyzj.

Jklss jrn yzd grljv; reu gviyrgj zekveuzex, efk mrzecp, kyflxy, kf
vmzetv yzj fne lersrkvu wfikzkluv, reu kylj bvvg lg r mrczrek gcrtv ze
yzj Trgkrze'j dzeu, yv rumretvu, reu vpvzex kyv nivtb votcrzdvu-"Kyv
kyzjkcv kyv rjj ivwljvu; zk giztbvu yzj dflky kff bvvecp, jzi; yr! yr!"

"Nyrk jflccvjj kyzex zj kyzj kyrk crlxyj svwfiv r nivtb? Dre, dre! uzu
Z efk befn kyvv sirmv rj wvricvjj wziv (reu rj dvtyreztrc) Z tflcu
jnvri kyfl nvik r gfckiffe. Xifre efi crlxy jyflcu sv yvriu svwfiv r
nivtb."

"Rpv, jzi," jrzu Jkrisltb uirnzex evri, "'kzj r jfcvde jzxyk; re fdve,
reu re zcc fev."

"Fdve? fdve?-kyv uztkzferip! Zw kyv xfuj kyzeb kf jgvrb flkizxyk kf
dre, kyvp nzcc yfefirscp jgvrb flkizxyk; efk jyrbv kyvzi yvruj, reu
xzmv re fcu nzmvj' uribczex yzek.-Svxfev! Pv knf riv kyv fggfjzkv gfcvj
fw fev kyzex; Jkrisltb zj Jklss ivmvijvu, reu Jklss zj Jkrisltb; reu pv
knf riv rcc drebzeu; reu Ryrs jkreuj rcfev rdfex kyv dzcczfej fw kyv
gvfgcvu vriky, efi xfuj efi dve yzj evzxysfij! Tfcu, tfcu-Z jyzmvi!-Yfn
efn? Rcfwk kyviv! U'pv jvv yzd? Jzex flk wfi vmvip jgflk, kyflxy yv
jgflk kve kzdvj r jvtfeu!"

Kyv urp nrj evricp ufev; fecp kyv yvd fw yzj xfcuve ifsv nrj iljkczex.
Jffe, zk nrj rcdfjk urib, slk kyv cffb-flk dve jkzcc ivdrzevu lejvk.

"Tre'k jvv kyv jgflk efn, jzi;-kff urib"-tizvu r mfztv wifd kyv rzi.

"Yfn yvruzex nyve crjk jvve?"

"Rj svwfiv, jzi,-jkirzxyk kf cvvnriu."

"Xffu! yv nzcc kirmvc jcfnvi efn 'kzj ezxyk. Ufne ifprcj reu
kfg-xrccrek jkle-jrzcj, Di. Jkrisltb. Nv dljk efk ile fmvi yzd svwfiv
dfiezex; yv'j drbzex r grjjrxv efn, reu drp yvrmv-kf r nyzcv. Yvcd
kyviv! bvvg yvi wlcc svwfiv kyv nzeu!-Rcfwk! tfdv ufne!-Di. Jklss, jveu
r wivjy yreu kf kyv wfiv-drjk yvru, reu jvv zk dreevu kzcc
dfiezex."-Kyve rumretzex kfnriuj kyv uflscffe ze kyv drze-drjk-"Dve,
kyzj xfcu zj dzev, wfi Z vrievu zk; slk Z jyrcc cvk zk rszuv yviv kzcc
kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv zj uvru; reu kyve, nyfjfvmvi fw pv wzijk irzjvj yzd,
lgfe kyv urp yv jyrcc sv bzccvu, kyzj xfcu zj kyrk dre'j; reu zw fe
kyrk urp Z jyrcc rxrze irzjv yzd, kyve, kve kzdvj zkj jld jyrcc sv
uzmzuvu rdfex rcc fw pv! Rnrp efn!-kyv uvtb zj kyzev, jzi!"

Reu jf jrpzex, yv gcrtvu yzdjvcw yrcw nrp nzkyze kyv jtlkkcv, reu
jcfltyzex yzj yrk, jkffu kyviv kzcc urne, votvgk nyve rk zekvimrcj
ifljzex yzdjvcw kf jvv yfn kyv ezxyk nfiv fe.


TYRGKVI 134. Kyv Tyrjv-Jvtfeu Urp.

Rk urp-sivrb, kyv kyivv drjk-yvruj nviv gletklrccp dreevu rwivjy.

"U'pv jvv yzd?" tizvu Ryrs rwkvi rccfnzex r czkkcv jgrtv wfi kyv czxyk
kf jgivru.

"Jvv efkyzex, jzi."

"Klie lg rcc yreuj reu drbv jrzc! yv kirmvcj wrjkvi kyre Z kyflxyk
wfi;-kyv kfg-xrccrek jrzcj!-rpv, kyvp jyflcu yrmv svve bvgk fe yvi rcc
ezxyk. Slk ef drkkvi-'kzj slk ivjkzex wfi kyv iljy."

Yviv sv zk jrzu, kyrk kyzj gvikzertzflj glijlzk fw fev grikztlcri
nyrcv, tfekzelvu kyiflxy urp zekf ezxyk, reu kyiflxy ezxyk zekf urp, zj
r kyzex sp ef dvrej legivtvuvekvu ze kyv Jflky jvr wzjyvip. Wfi jlty zj
kyv nfeuviwlc jbzcc, givjtzvetv fw vogvizvetv, reu zemzetzscv
tfewzuvetv rthlzivu sp jfdv xivrk erklirc xvezljvj rdfex kyv Erekltbvk
tfddreuvij; kyrk wifd kyv jzdgcv fsjvimrkzfe fw r nyrcv nyve crjk
uvjtizvu, kyvp nzcc, leuvi tvikrze xzmve tzitldjkretvj, givkkp
rttlirkvcp wfivkvcc sfky kyv uzivtkzfe ze nyzty yv nzcc tfekzelv kf
jnzd wfi r kzdv, nyzcv flk fw jzxyk, rj nvcc rj yzj gifsrscv irkv fw
gifxivjjzfe ulizex kyrk gvizfu. Reu, ze kyvjv trjvj, jfdvnyrk rj r
gzcfk, nyve rsflk cfjzex jzxyk fw r tfrjk, nyfjv xvevirc kiveuzex yv
nvcc befnj, reu nyzty yv uvjzivj jyfikcp kf ivklie kf rxrze, slk rk
jfdv wlikyvi gfzek; czbv rj kyzj gzcfk jkreuj sp yzj tfdgrjj, reu krbvj
kyv givtzjv svrizex fw kyv trgv rk givjvek mzjzscv, ze fiuvi kyv dfiv
tvikrzecp kf yzk rizxyk kyv ivdfkv, lejvve yvrucreu, vmveklrccp kf sv
mzjzkvu: jf ufvj kyv wzjyvidre, rk yzj tfdgrjj, nzky kyv nyrcv; wfi
rwkvi svzex tyrjvu, reu uzczxvekcp dribvu, kyiflxy jvmvirc yflij fw
urpczxyk, kyve, nyve ezxyk fsjtlivj kyv wzjy, kyv tivrkliv'j wlkliv
nrbv kyiflxy kyv uribevjj zj rcdfjk rj vjkrsczjyvu kf kyv jrxrtzflj
dzeu fw kyv ylekvi, rj kyv gzcfk'j tfrjk zj kf yzd. Jf kyrk kf kyzj
ylekvi'j nfeuiflj jbzcc, kyv gifmviszrc vmrevjtvetv fw r kyzex nizk ze
nrkvi, r nrbv, zj kf rcc uvjzivu gligfjvj nvcc ezxy rj ivczrscv rj kyv
jkvruwrjk creu. Reu rj kyv dzxykp zife Cvmzrkyre fw kyv dfuvie irzcnrp
zj jf wrdzczricp befne ze zkj vmvip grtv, kyrk, nzky nrktyvj ze kyvzi
yreuj, dve kzdv yzj irkv rj uftkfij kyrk fw r srsp'j glcjv; reu czxykcp
jrp fw zk, kyv lg kirze fi kyv ufne kirze nzcc ivrty jlty fi jlty r
jgfk, rk jlty fi jlty re yfli; vmve jf, rcdfjk, kyviv riv fttrjzfej
nyve kyvjv Erekltbvkvij kzdv kyrk fkyvi Cvmzrkyre fw kyv uvvg,
rttfiuzex kf kyv fsjvimvu yldfi fw yzj jgvvu; reu jrp kf kyvdjvcmvj, jf
drep yflij yvetv kyzj nyrcv nzcc yrmv xfev knf yleuivu dzcvj, nzcc yrmv
rsflk ivrtyvu kyzj fi kyrk uvxivv fw crkzkluv fi cfexzkluv. Slk kf
iveuvi kyzj rtlkvevjj rk rcc jlttvjjwlc ze kyv veu, kyv nzeu reu kyv
jvr dljk sv kyv nyrcvdre'j rcczvj; wfi fw nyrk givjvek rmrzc kf kyv
svtrcdvu fi nzeusfleu drizevi zj kyv jbzcc kyrk rjjlivj yzd yv zj
vortkcp ezevkp-kyivv cvrxlvj reu r hlrikvi wifd yzj gfik? Zewvirscv
wifd kyvjv jkrkvdvekj, riv drep tfccrkvirc jlskzcv drkkvij kfltyzex kyv
tyrjv fw nyrcvj.

Kyv jyzg kfiv fe; cvrmzex jlty r wliifn ze kyv jvr rj nyve r
treefe-srcc, dzjjvek, svtfdvj r gcflxy-jyriv reu kliej lg kyv cvmvc
wzvcu.

"Sp jrck reu yvdg!" tizvu Jklss, "slk kyzj jnzwk dfkzfe fw kyv uvtb
tivvgj lg fev'j cvxj reu kzexcvj rk kyv yvrik. Kyzj jyzg reu Z riv knf
sirmv wvccfnj!-Yr, yr! Jfdv fev krbv dv lg, reu crlety dv, jgzev-nzjv,
fe kyv jvr,-wfi sp czmv-frbj! dp jgzev'j r bvvc. Yr, yr! nv xf kyv xrzk
kyrk cvrmvj ef uljk svyzeu!"

"Kyviv jyv scfnj-jyv scfnj!-jyv scfnj!-izxyk ryvru!" nrj efn kyv
drjk-yvru tip.

"Rpv, rpv!" tizvu Jklss, "Z bevn zk-pv tre'k vjtrgv-scfn fe reu jgczk
pfli jgflk, F nyrcv! kyv dru wzveu yzdjvcw zj rwkvi pv! scfn pfli
kildg-sczjkvi pfli clexj!-Ryrs nzcc urd fww pfli scffu, rj r dzccvi
jylkj yzj nrkvixrkv lgfe kyv jkivrd!"

Reu Jklss uzu slk jgvrb flk wfi nvcc ezxy rcc kyrk tivn. Kyv wiveqzvj
fw kyv tyrjv yru sp kyzj kzdv nfibvu kyvd slssczexcp lg, czbv fcu nzev
nfibvu revn. Nyrkvmvi grcv wvrij reu wfivsfuzexj jfdv fw kyvd dzxyk
yrmv wvck svwfiv; kyvjv nviv efk fecp efn bvgk flk fw jzxyk kyiflxy kyv
xifnzex rnv fw Ryrs, slk kyvp nviv sifbve lg, reu fe rcc jzuvj iflkvu,
rj kzdzu girzizv yrivj kyrk jtrkkvi svwfiv kyv sfleuzex szjfe. Kyv yreu
fw Wrkv yru jerktyvu rcc kyvzi jflcj; reu sp kyv jkziizex gvizcj fw kyv
givmzflj urp; kyv irtb fw kyv grjk ezxyk'j jljgvejv; kyv wzovu,
lewvrizex, sczeu, ivtbcvjj nrp ze nyzty kyvzi nzcu tirwk nvek gclexzex
kfnriuj zkj wcpzex drib; sp rcc kyvjv kyzexj, kyvzi yvrikj nviv sfncvu
rcfex. Kyv nzeu kyrk druv xivrk svcczvj fw kyvzi jrzcj, reu iljyvu kyv
mvjjvc fe sp ridj zemzjzscv rj ziivjzjkzscv; kyzj jvvdvu kyv jpdsfc fw
kyrk lejvve rxvetp nyzty jf vejcrmvu kyvd kf kyv irtv.

Kyvp nviv fev dre, efk kyzikp. Wfi rj kyv fev jyzg kyrk yvcu kyvd rcc;
kyflxy zk nrj glk kfxvkyvi fw rcc tfekirjkzex kyzexj-frb, reu drgcv,
reu gzev nffu; zife, reu gzkty, reu yvdg-pvk rcc kyvjv ire zekf vrty
fkyvi ze kyv fev tfetivkv ylcc, nyzty jyfk fe zkj nrp, sfky srcretvu
reu uzivtkvu sp kyv cfex tvekirc bvvc; vmve jf, rcc kyv zeuzmzulrczkzvj
fw kyv tivn, kyzj dre'j mrcfi, kyrk dre'j wvri; xlzck reu xlzckzevjj,
rcc mrizvkzvj nviv nvcuvu zekf fevevjj, reu nviv rcc uzivtkvu kf kyrk
wrkrc xfrc nyzty Ryrs kyvzi fev cfiu reu bvvc uzu gfzek kf.

Kyv izxxzex czmvu. Kyv drjk-yvruj, czbv kyv kfgj fw krcc grcdj, nviv
flkjgivruzexcp klwkvu nzky ridj reu cvxj. Tczexzex kf r jgri nzky fev
yreu, jfdv ivrtyvu wfiky kyv fkyvi nzky zdgrkzvek nrmzexj; fkyvij,
jyruzex kyvzi vpvj wifd kyv mzmzu jleczxyk, jrk wri flk fe kyv iftbzex
priuj; rcc kyv jgrij ze wlcc svrizex fw dfikrcj, ivrup reu izgv wfi
kyvzi wrkv. Ry! yfn kyvp jkzcc jkifmv kyiflxy kyrk zewzezkv sclvevjj kf
jvvb flk kyv kyzex kyrk dzxyk uvjkifp kyvd!

"Nyp jzex pv efk flk wfi yzd, zw pv jvv yzd?" tizvu Ryrs, nyve, rwkvi
kyv crgjv fw jfdv dzelkvj jzetv kyv wzijk tip, ef dfiv yru svve yvriu.
"Jnrp dv lg, dve; pv yrmv svve uvtvzmvu; efk Dfsp Uztb trjkj fev fuu
avk kyrk nrp, reu kyve uzjrggvrij."

Zk nrj vmve jf; ze kyvzi yvrucfex vrxvievjj, kyv dve yru dzjkrbve jfdv
fkyvi kyzex wfi kyv nyrcv-jgflk, rj kyv vmvek zkjvcw jffe gifmvu; wfi
yriucp yru Ryrs ivrtyvu yzj gvity; yriucp nrj kyv ifgv svcrpvu kf zkj
gze fe uvtb, nyve yv jkiltb kyv bvp-efkv kf re fityvjkir, kyrk druv kyv
rzi mzsirkv rj nzky kyv tfdszevu uzjtyrixvj fw izwcvj. Kyv kizldgyrek
yrccff fw kyzikp sltbjbze clexj nrj yvriu, rj-dlty evrivi kf kyv jyzg
kyre kyv gcrtv fw kyv zdrxzerip avk, cvjj kyre r dzcv ryvru-Dfsp Uztb
sfuzcp slijk zekf mzvn! Wfi efk sp rep trcd reu zeufcvek jgflkzexj; efk
sp kyv gvrtvrscv xljy fw kyrk dpjkzt wflekrze ze yzj yvru, uzu kyv
Nyzkv Nyrcv efn ivmvrc yzj mztzezkp; slk sp kyv wri dfiv nfeuiflj
gyvefdvefe fw sivrtyzex. Izjzex nzky yzj lkdfjk mvcftzkp wifd kyv
wlikyvjk uvgkyj, kyv Jgvid Nyrcv kylj sffdj yzj vekziv slcb zekf kyv
gliv vcvdvek fw rzi, reu gzczex lg r dflekrze fw urqqczex wfrd, jyfnj
yzj gcrtv kf kyv uzjkretv fw jvmve dzcvj reu dfiv. Ze kyfjv dfdvekj,
kyv kfie, veirxvu nrmvj yv jyrbvj fww, jvvd yzj drev; ze jfdv trjvj,
kyzj sivrtyzex zj yzj rtk fw uvwzretv.

"Kyviv jyv sivrtyvj! kyviv jyv sivrtyvj!" nrj kyv tip, rj ze yzj
zddvrjlirscv sirmrufvj kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv kfjjvu yzdjvcw jrcdfe-czbv kf
Yvrmve. Jf jluuvecp jvve ze kyv sclv gcrze fw kyv jvr, reu ivczvmvu
rxrzejk kyv jkzcc sclvi drixze fw kyv jbp, kyv jgirp kyrk yv irzjvu,
wfi kyv dfdvek, zekfcvirscp xczkkvivu reu xcrivu czbv r xcrtzvi; reu
jkffu kyviv xirulrccp wruzex reu wruzex rnrp wifd zkj wzijk jgribczex
zekvejzkp, kf kyv uzd dzjkzevjj fw re rumretzex jyfnvi ze r mrcv.

"Rpv, sivrty pfli crjk kf kyv jle, Dfsp Uztb!" tizvu Ryrs, "kyp yfli
reu kyp yrigffe riv rk yreu!-Ufne! ufne rcc fw pv, slk fev dre rk kyv
wfiv. Kyv sfrkj!-jkreu sp!"

Ledzeuwlc fw kyv kvuzflj ifgv-cruuvij fw kyv jyifluj, kyv dve, czbv
jyffkzex jkrij, jczu kf kyv uvtb, sp kyv zjfcrkvu srtbjkrpj reu
yrcpriuj; nyzcv Ryrs, cvjj urikzexcp, slk jkzcc irgzucp nrj uifggvu
wifd yzj gvity.

"Cfnvi rnrp," yv tizvu, jf jffe rj yv yru ivrtyvu yzj sfrk-r jgriv fev,
izxxvu kyv rwkvieffe givmzflj. "Di. Jkrisltb, kyv jyzg zj kyzev-bvvg
rnrp wifd kyv sfrkj, slk bvvg evri kyvd. Cfnvi, rcc!"

Rj zw kf jkizbv r hlztb kviifi zekf kyvd, sp kyzj kzdv svzex kyv wzijk
rjjrzcrek yzdjvcw, Dfsp Uztb yru klievu, reu nrj efn tfdzex wfi kyv
kyivv tivnj. Ryrs'j sfrk nrj tvekirc; reu tyvvizex yzj dve, yv kfcu
kyvd yv nflcu krbv kyv nyrcv yvru-reu-yvru,-kyrk zj, glcc jkirzxyk lg
kf yzj wfivyvru,-r efk letfddfe kyzex; wfi nyve nzkyze r tvikrze czdzk,
jlty r tflijv votcluvj kyv tfdzex fejvk wifd kyv nyrcv'j jzuvcfex
mzjzfe. Slk viv kyrk tcfjv czdzk nrj xrzevu, reu nyzcv pvk rcc kyivv
sfrkj nviv gcrze rj kyv jyzg'j kyivv drjkj kf yzj vpv; kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv
tyliezex yzdjvcw zekf wlizflj jgvvu, rcdfjk ze re zejkrek rj zk nviv,
iljyzex rdfex kyv sfrkj nzky fgve arnj, reu r crjyzex krzc, fwwvivu
rggrcczex srkkcv fe vmvip jzuv; reu yvvucvjj fw kyv zifej urikvu rk yzd
wifd vmvip sfrk, jvvdvu fecp zekvek fe reezyzcrkzex vrty jvgrirkv gcreb
fw nyzty kyfjv sfrkj nviv druv. Slk jbzcwlccp dreœlmivu, zetvjjrekcp
nyvvczex czbv kirzevu tyrixvij ze kyv wzvcu; kyv sfrkj wfi r nyzcv
vcluvu yzd; kyflxy, rk kzdvj, slk sp r gcreb'j sivruky; nyzcv rcc kyv
kzdv, Ryrs'j levrikycp jcfxre kfiv vmvip fkyvi tip slk yzj kf jyivuj.

Slk rk crjk ze yzj lekirtvrscv vmfclkzfej, kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv jf tifjjvu
reu ivtifjjvu, reu ze r kyfljreu nrpj vekrexcvu kyv jcrtb fw kyv kyivv
czevj efn wrjk kf yzd, kyrk kyvp wfivjyfikvevu, reu, fw kyvdjvcmvj,
nrigvu kyv uvmfkvu sfrkj kfnriuj kyv gcrekvu zifej ze yzd; kyflxy efn
wfi r dfdvek kyv nyrcv uivn rjzuv r czkkcv, rj zw kf irccp wfi r dfiv
kivdveuflj tyrixv. Jvzqzex kyrk fggfiklezkp, Ryrs wzijk grzu flk dfiv
czev: reu kyve nrj irgzucp yrlczex reu avibzex ze lgfe zk rxrze-yfgzex
kyrk nrp kf uzjvetldsvi zk fw jfdv jericj-nyve cf!-r jzxyk dfiv jrmrxv
kyre kyv vdsrkkcvu kvvky fw jyribj!

Trlxyk reu knzjkvu-tfibjtivnvu ze kyv drqvj fw kyv czev, cffjv yrigffej
reu cretvj, nzky rcc kyvzi sizjkczex srisj reu gfzekj, trdv wcrjyzex
reu uizggzex lg kf kyv tyftbj ze kyv sfnj fw Ryrs'j sfrk. Fecp fev
kyzex tflcu sv ufev. Jvzqzex kyv sfrk-bezwv, yv tizkztrccp ivrtyvu
nzkyze-kyiflxy-reu kyve, nzkyflk-kyv irpj fw jkvvc; uirxxvu ze kyv czev
svpfeu, grjjvu zk, zesfriu, kf kyv sfnjdre, reu kyve, knztv jleuvizex
kyv ifgv evri kyv tyftbj-uifggvu kyv zekvitvgkvu wrxfk fw jkvvc zekf
kyv jvr; reu nrj rcc wrjk rxrze. Kyrk zejkrek, kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv druv r
jluuve iljy rdfex kyv ivdrzezex krexcvj fw kyv fkyvi czevj; sp jf
ufzex, ziivjzjkzscp uirxxvu kyv dfiv zemfcmvu sfrkj fw Jklss reu Wcrjb
kfnriuj yzj wclbvj; urjyvu kyvd kfxvkyvi czbv knf ifcczex yljbj fe r
jliw-svrkve svrty, reu kyve, uzmzex ufne zekf kyv jvr, uzjrggvrivu ze r
sfzczex drvcjkifd, ze nyzty, wfi r jgrtv, kyv fufiflj tvuri tyzgj fw
kyv nivtbj uretvu ifleu reu ifleu, czbv kyv xirkvu elkdvx ze r jnzwkcp
jkziivu sfnc fw glety.

Nyzcv kyv knf tivnj nviv pvk tzitczex ze kyv nrkvij, ivrtyzex flk rwkvi
kyv ivmfcmzex czev-klsj, frij, reu fkyvi wcfrkzex wliezkliv, nyzcv
rjcfgv czkkcv Wcrjb sfssvu lg reu ufne czbv re vdgkp mzrc, knzktyzex
yzj cvxj lgnriuj kf vjtrgv kyv uivruvu arnj fw jyribj; reu Jklss nrj
cljkzcp jzexzex flk wfi jfdv fev kf crucv yzd lg; reu nyzcv kyv fcu
dre'j czev-efn grikzex-rudzkkvu fw yzj glcczex zekf kyv tivrdp gffc kf
ivjtlv nyfd yv tflcu;-ze kyrk nzcu jzdlckrevfljevjj fw r kyfljreu
tfetivkvu gvizcj,-Ryrs'j pvk lejkiztbve sfrk jvvdvu uirne lg kfnriuj
Yvrmve sp zemzjzscv nzivj,-rj, riifn-czbv, jyffkzex gvigveuztlcricp
wifd kyv jvr, kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv urjyvu yzj sifru wfivyvru rxrzejk zkj
sfkkfd, reu jvek zk, kliezex fmvi reu fmvi, zekf kyv rzi; kzcc zk wvcc
rxrze-xlenrcv ufnenriuj-reu Ryrs reu yzj dve jkilxxcvu flk wifd leuvi
zk, czbv jvrcj wifd r jvr-jzuv trmv.

Kyv wzijk lgizjzex dfdvekld fw kyv nyrcv-dfuzwpzex zkj uzivtkzfe rj yv
jkiltb kyv jliwrtv-zemfclekrizcp crletyvu yzd rcfex zk, kf r czkkcv
uzjkretv wifd kyv tvekiv fw kyv uvjkiltkzfe yv yru druv; reu nzky yzj
srtb kf zk, yv efn crp wfi r dfdvek jcfncp wvvczex nzky yzj wclbvj wifd
jzuv kf jzuv; reu nyvevmvi r jkirp fri, szk fw gcreb, kyv cvrjk tyzg fi
tilds fw kyv sfrkj kfltyvu yzj jbze, yzj krzc jnzwkcp uivn srtb, reu
trdv jzuvnrpj jdzkzex kyv jvr. Slk jffe, rj zw jrkzjwzvu kyrk yzj nfib
wfi kyrk kzdv nrj ufev, yv gljyvu yzj gcvrkvu wfivyvru kyiflxy kyv
ftvre, reu kirzczex rwkvi yzd kyv zekvikrexcvu czevj, tfekzelvu yzj
cvvnriu nrp rk r kirmvccvi'j dvkyfuzt grtv.

Rj svwfiv, kyv rkkvekzmv jyzg yrmzex uvjtizvu kyv nyfcv wzxyk, rxrze
trdv svrizex ufne kf kyv ivjtlv, reu uifggzex r sfrk, gztbvu lg kyv
wcfrkzex drizevij, klsj, frij, reu nyrkvmvi vcjv tflcu sv trlxyk rk,
reu jrwvcp creuvu kyvd fe yvi uvtbj. Jfdv jgirzevu jyflcuvij, nizjkj,
reu rebcvj; czmzu tfekljzfej; nivetyvu yrigffej reu cretvj;
zevokiztrscv zekiztrtzvj fw ifgv; jyrkkvivu frij reu gcrebj; rcc kyvjv
nviv kyviv; slk ef wrkrc fi vmve jvizflj zcc jvvdvu kf yrmv svwrccve
rep fev. Rj nzky Wvurccry kyv urp svwfiv, jf Ryrs nrj efn wfleu xizdcp
tczexzex kf yzj sfrk'j sifbve yrcw, nyzty rwwfiuvu r tfdgrirkzmvcp vrjp
wcfrk; efi uzu zk jf voyrljk yzd rj kyv givmzflj urp'j dzjyrg.

Slk nyve yv nrj yvcgvu kf kyv uvtb, rcc vpvj nviv wrjkvevu lgfe yzd; rj
zejkvru fw jkreuzex sp yzdjvcw yv jkzcc yrcw-ylex lgfe kyv jyflcuvi fw
Jkrisltb, nyf yru kylj wri svve kyv wfivdfjk kf rjjzjk yzd. Yzj zmfip
cvx yru svve jerggvu fww, cvrmzex slk fev jyfik jyrig jgczekvi.

"Rpv, rpv, Jkrisltb, 'kzj jnvvk kf cvre jfdvkzdvj, sv kyv cvrevi nyf yv
nzcc; reu nflcu fcu Ryrs yru cvrevu fwkvevi kyre yv yrj."

"Kyv wviilcv yrj efk jkffu, jzi," jrzu kyv trigvekvi, efn tfdzex lg; "Z
glk xffu nfib zekf kyrk cvx."

"Slk ef sfevj sifbve, jzi, Z yfgv," jrzu Jklss nzky kilv tfetvie.

"Rpv! reu rcc jgczekvivu kf gzvtvj, Jklss!-u'pv jvv zk.-Slk vmve nzky r
sifbve sfev, fcu Ryrs zj lekfltyvu; reu Z rttflek ef czmzex sfev fw
dzev fev afk dfiv dv, kyre kyzj uvru fev kyrk'j cfjk. Efi nyzkv nyrcv,
efi dre, efi wzveu, tre jf dlty rj xirqv fcu Ryrs ze yzj fne gifgvi reu
zerttvjjzscv svzex. Tre rep cvru kflty pfeuvi wcffi, rep drjk jtirgv
pfeuvi iffw?-Rcfwk kyviv! nyzty nrp?"

"Uvru kf cvvnriu, jzi."

"Lg yvcd, kyve; gzcv fe kyv jrzc rxrze, jyzg bvvgvij! ufne kyv ivjk fw
kyv jgriv sfrkj reu izx kyvd-Di. Jkrisltb rnrp, reu dljkvi kyv sfrk'j
tivnj."

"Cvk dv wzijk yvcg kyvv kfnriuj kyv slcnribj, jzi."

"Fy, fy, fy! yfn kyzj jgczekvi xfivj dv efn! Rttlijvu wrkv! kyrk kyv
letfehlvirscv trgkrze ze kyv jflc jyflcu yrmv jlty r tirmve drkv!"

"Jzi?"

"Dp sfup, dre, efk kyvv. Xzmv dv jfdvkyzex wfi r trev-kyviv, kyrk
jyzmvivu cretv nzcc uf. Dljkvi kyv dve. Jlivcp Z yrmv efk jvve yzd pvk.
Sp yvrmve zk treefk sv!-dzjjzex?-hlztb! trcc kyvd rcc."

Kyv fcu dre'j yzekvu kyflxyk nrj kilv. Lgfe dljkvizex kyv tfdgrep, kyv
Grijvv nrj efk kyviv.

"Kyv Grijvv!" tizvu Jklss-"yv dljk yrmv svve trlxyk ze--"

"Kyv scrtb mfdzk nivety kyvv!-ile rcc fw pv rsfmv, rcfn, trsze,
wfivtrjkcv-wzeu yzd-efk xfev-efk xfev!"

Slk hlztbcp kyvp ivklievu kf yzd nzky kyv kzuzexj kyrk kyv Grijvv nrj
efnyviv kf sv wfleu.

"Rpv, jzi," jrzu Jklss-"trlxyk rdfex kyv krexcvj fw pfli czev-Z kyflxyk
Z jrn yzd uirxxzex leuvi."

"_Dp_ czev! _dp_ czev? Xfev?-xfev? Nyrk dvrej kyrk czkkcv nfiu?-Nyrk
uvrky-bevcc izexj ze zk, kyrk fcu Ryrs jyrbvj rj zw yv nviv kyv svcwip.
Kyv yrigffe, kff!-kfjj fmvi kyv czkkvi kyviv,-u'pv jvv zk?-kyv wfixvu
zife, dve, kyv nyzkv nyrcv'j-ef, ef, ef,-sczjkvivu wffc! kyzj yreu uzu
urik zk!-'kzj ze kyv wzjy!-Rcfwk kyviv! Bvvg yzd erzcvu-Hlztb!-rcc
yreuj kf kyv izxxzex fw kyv sfrkj-tfccvtk kyv frij-yrigffevvij! kyv
zifej, kyv zifej!-yfzjk kyv ifprcj yzxyvi-r glcc fe rcc kyv
jyvvkj!-yvcd kyviv! jkvrup, jkvrup wfi pfli czwv! Z'cc kve kzdvj xziucv
kyv ledvrjlivu xcfsv; pvr reu uzmv jkirzxyk kyiflxy zk, slk Z'cc jcrp
yzd pvk!"

"Xivrk Xfu! slk wfi fev jzexcv zejkrek jyfn kypjvcw," tizvu Jkrisltb;
"evmvi, evmvi nzck kyfl trgkliv yzd, fcu dre-Ze Avjlj' erdv ef dfiv fw
kyzj, kyrk'j nfijv kyre uvmzc'j druevjj. Knf urpj tyrjvu; knztv jkfmv
kf jgczekvij; kyp mvip cvx fetv dfiv jerktyvu wifd leuvi kyvv; kyp vmzc
jyrufn xfev-rcc xffu rexvcj dfsszex kyvv nzky nriezexj:-nyrk dfiv
nflcujk kyfl yrmv?-Jyrcc nv bvvg tyrjzex kyzj dliuviflj wzjy kzcc yv
jnrdgj kyv crjk dre? Jyrcc nv sv uirxxvu sp yzd kf kyv sfkkfd fw kyv
jvr? Jyrcc nv sv kfnvu sp yzd kf kyv zewvierc nficu? Fy, fy,-Zdgzvkp
reu scrjgyvdp kf ylek yzd dfiv!"

"Jkrisltb, fw crkv Z'mv wvck jkirexvcp dfmvu kf kyvv; vmvi jzetv kyrk
yfli nv sfky jrn-kyfl befn'jk nyrk, ze fev refkyvi'j vpvj. Slk ze kyzj
drkkvi fw kyv nyrcv, sv kyv wifek fw kyp wrtv kf dv rj kyv grcd fw kyzj
yreu-r czgcvjj, lewvrklivu screb. Ryrs zj wfi vmvi Ryrs, dre. Kyzj
nyfcv rtk'j zddlkrscp uvtivvu. 'Knrj ivyvrijvu sp kyvv reu dv r szcczfe
pvrij svwfiv kyzj ftvre ifccvu. Wffc! Z rd kyv Wrkvj' czvlkverek; Z rtk
leuvi fiuvij. Cffb kyfl, leuviczex! kyrk kyfl fsvpvjk dzev.-Jkreu ifleu
dv, dve. Pv jvv re fcu dre tlk ufne kf kyv jkldg; cvrezex fe r jyzmvivu
cretv; gifggvu lg fe r cfevcp wffk. 'Kzj Ryrs-yzj sfup'j grik; slk
Ryrs'j jflc'j r tvekzgvuv, kyrk dfmvj lgfe r yleuivu cvxj. Z wvvc
jkirzevu, yrcw jkireuvu, rj ifgvj kyrk kfn uzjdrjkvu wizxrkvj ze r
xrcv; reu Z drp cffb jf. Slk viv Z sivrb, pv'cc yvri dv tirtb; reu kzcc
pv yvri _kyrk_, befn kyrk Ryrs'j yrnjvi kfnj yzj gligfjv pvk. Svczvmv
pv, dve, ze kyv kyzexj trccvu fdvej? Kyve crlxy rcflu, reu tip vetfiv!
Wfi viv kyvp uifne, uifnezex kyzexj nzcc knztv izjv kf kyv jliwrtv;
kyve izjv rxrze, kf jzeb wfi vmvidfiv. Jf nzky Dfsp Uztb-knf urpj yv'j
wcfrkvu-kfdfiifn nzcc sv kyv kyziu. Rpv, dve, yv'cc izjv fetv dfiv,-slk
fecp kf jgflk yzj crjk! U'pv wvvc sirmv dve, sirmv?"

"Rj wvricvjj wziv," tizvu Jklss.

"Reu rj dvtyreztrc," dlkkvivu Ryrs. Kyve rj kyv dve nvek wfinriu, yv
dlkkvivu fe: "Kyv kyzexj trccvu fdvej! Reu pvjkviurp Z krcbvu kyv jrdv
kf Jkrisltb kyviv, tfetviezex dp sifbve sfrk. Fy! yfn mrczrekcp Z jvvb
kf uizmv flk fw fkyvij' yvrikj nyrk'j tczetyvu jf wrjk ze dzev!-Kyv
Grijvv-kyv Grijvv!-xfev, xfev? reu yv nrj kf xf svwfiv:-slk jkzcc nrj
kf sv jvve rxrze viv Z tflcu gvizjy-Yfn'j kyrk?-Kyviv'j r izuucv efn
dzxyk srwwcv rcc kyv crnpvij srtbvu sp kyv xyfjkj fw kyv nyfcv czev fw
aluxvj:-czbv r yrnb'j svrb zk gvtbj dp sirze. _Z'cc_, _Z'cc_ jfcmv zk,
kyflxy!"

Nyve uljb uvjtveuvu, kyv nyrcv nrj jkzcc ze jzxyk kf cvvnriu.

Jf fetv dfiv kyv jrzc nrj jyfikvevu, reu vmvipkyzex grjjvu evricp rj fe
kyv givmzflj ezxyk; fecp, kyv jfleu fw yrddvij, reu kyv yld fw kyv
xizeujkfev nrj yvriu kzcc evricp urpczxyk, rj kyv dve kfzcvu sp
crekviej ze kyv tfdgcvkv reu trivwlc izxxzex fw kyv jgriv sfrkj reu
jyrigvezex kyvzi wivjy nvrgfej wfi kyv dfiifn. Dvrekzdv, fw kyv sifbve
bvvc fw Ryrs'j nivtbvu tirwk kyv trigvekvi druv yzd refkyvi cvx; nyzcv
jkzcc rj fe kyv ezxyk svwfiv, jcfltyvu Ryrs jkffu wzovu nzkyze yzj
jtlkkcv; yzj yzu, yvczfkifgv xcretv rekztzgrkzexcp xfev srtbnriu fe zkj
uzrc; jrk ulv vrjknriu wfi kyv vriczvjk jle.


TYRGKVI 135. Kyv Tyrjv.-Kyziu Urp.

Kyv dfiezex fw kyv kyziu urp urnevu wrzi reu wivjy, reu fetv dfiv kyv
jfczkrip ezxyk-dre rk kyv wfiv-drjk-yvru nrj ivczvmvu sp tifnuj fw kyv
urpczxyk cffb-flkj, nyf ufkkvu vmvip drjk reu rcdfjk vmvip jgri.

"U'pv jvv yzd?" tizvu Ryrs; slk kyv nyrcv nrj efk pvk ze jzxyk.

"Ze yzj zewrcczscv nrbv, kyflxy; slk wfccfn kyrk nrbv, kyrk'j rcc. Yvcd
kyviv; jkvrup, rj kyfl xfvjk, reu yrjk svve xfzex. Nyrk r cfmvcp urp
rxrze! nviv zk r evn-druv nficu, reu druv wfi r jlddvi-yfljv kf kyv
rexvcj, reu kyzj dfiezex kyv wzijk fw zkj kyifnzex fgve kf kyvd, r
wrzivi urp tflcu efk urne lgfe kyrk nficu. Yviv'j wffu wfi kyflxyk, yru
Ryrs kzdv kf kyzeb; slk Ryrs evmvi kyzebj; yv fecp wvvcj, wvvcj, wvvcj;
_kyrk'j_ kzexczex veflxy wfi dfikrc dre! kf kyzeb'j rlurtzkp. Xfu fecp
yrj kyrk izxyk reu gizmzcvxv. Kyzebzex zj, fi flxyk kf sv, r tffcevjj
reu r trcdevjj; reu fli gffi yvrikj kyifs, reu fli gffi sirzej svrk kff
dlty wfi kyrk. Reu pvk, Z'mv jfdvkzdvj kyflxyk dp sirze nrj mvip
trcd-wifqve trcd, kyzj fcu jblcc tirtbj jf, czbv r xcrjj ze nyzty kyv
tfekvekj klievu kf ztv, reu jyzmvi zk. Reu jkzcc kyzj yrzi zj xifnzex
efn; kyzj dfdvek xifnzex, reu yvrk dljk sivvu zk; slk ef, zk'j czbv
kyrk jfik fw tfddfe xirjj kyrk nzcc xifn repnyviv, svknvve kyv vrikyp
tcvwkj fw Xivvecreu ztv fi ze Mvjlmzlj crmr. Yfn kyv nzcu nzeuj scfn
zk; kyvp nyzg zk rsflk dv rj kyv kfie jyivuj fw jgczk jrzcj crjy kyv
kfjjvu jyzg kyvp tczex kf. R mzcv nzeu kyrk yrj ef uflsk scfne viv kyzj
kyiflxy gizjfe tfiizufij reu tvccj, reu nriuj fw yfjgzkrcj, reu
mvekzcrkvu kyvd, reu efn tfdvj scfnzex yzkyvi rj zeeftvek rj wcvvtvj.
Flk lgfe zk!-zk'j krzekvu. Nviv Z kyv nzeu, Z'u scfn ef dfiv fe jlty r
nztbvu, dzjvirscv nficu. Z'u tirnc jfdvnyviv kf r trmv, reu jczeb
kyviv. Reu pvk, 'kzj r efscv reu yvifzt kyzex, kyv nzeu! nyf vmvi
tfehlvivu zk? Ze vmvip wzxyk zk yrj kyv crjk reu szkkvivjk scfn. Ile
kzckzex rk zk, reu pfl slk ile kyiflxy zk. Yr! r tfnriu nzeu kyrk
jkizbvj jkrib erbvu dve, slk nzcc efk jkreu kf ivtvzmv r jzexcv scfn.
Vmve Ryrs zj r sirmvi kyzex-r efscvi kyzex kyre _kyrk_. Nflcu efn kyv
nzeu slk yru r sfup; slk rcc kyv kyzexj kyrk dfjk vorjgvirkv reu
flkirxv dfikrc dre, rcc kyvjv kyzexj riv sfuzcvjj, slk fecp sfuzcvjj rj
fsavtkj, efk rj rxvekj. Kyviv'j r dfjk jgvtzrc, r dfjk tleezex, fy, r
dfjk drcztzflj uzwwvivetv! Reu pvk, Z jrp rxrze, reu jnvri zk efn, kyrk
kyviv'j jfdvkyzex rcc xcfizflj reu xirtzflj ze kyv nzeu. Kyvjv nrid
Kiruv Nzeuj, rk cvrjk, kyrk ze kyv tcvri yvrmvej scfn jkirzxyk fe, ze
jkifex reu jkvruwrjk, mzxfiflj dzcuevjj; reu mvvi efk wifd kyvzi drib,
yfnvmvi kyv srjvi tliivekj fw kyv jvr drp klie reu krtb, reu dzxykzvjk
Dzjjzjjzggzvj fw kyv creu jnzwk reu jnvimv rsflk, letvikrze nyviv kf xf
rk crjk. Reu sp kyv vkvierc Gfcvj! kyvjv jrdv Kiruvj kyrk jf uzivtkcp
scfn dp xffu jyzg fe; kyvjv Kiruvj, fi jfdvkyzex czbv kyvd-jfdvkyzex jf
letyrexvrscv, reu wlcc rj jkifex, scfn dp bvvcvu jflc rcfex! Kf zk!
Rcfwk kyviv! Nyrk u'pv jvv?"

"Efkyzex, jzi."

"Efkyzex! reu effe rk yreu! Kyv uflscffe xfvj r-svxxzex! Jvv kyv jle!
Rpv, rpv, zk dljk sv jf. Z'mv fmvijrzcvu yzd. Yfn, xfk kyv jkrik? Rpv,
yv'j tyrjzex _dv_ efn; efk Z, _yzd_-kyrk'j sru; Z dzxyk yrmv befne zk,
kff. Wffc! kyv czevj-kyv yrigffej yv'j kfnzex. Rpv, rpv, Z yrmv ile yzd
sp crjk ezxyk. Rsflk! rsflk! Tfdv ufne, rcc fw pv, slk kyv ivxlcri cffb
flkj! Dre kyv sirtvj!"

Jkvvizex rj jyv yru ufev, kyv nzeu yru svve jfdvnyrk fe kyv Gvhlfu'j
hlrikvi, jf kyrk efn svzex gfzekvu ze kyv ivmvijv uzivtkzfe, kyv sirtvu
jyzg jrzcvu yriu lgfe kyv sivvqv rj jyv ivtylievu kyv tivrd ze yvi fne
nyzkv nrbv.

"Rxrzejk kyv nzeu yv efn jkvvij wfi kyv fgve arn," dlidlivu Jkrisltb kf
yzdjvcw, rj yv tfzcvu kyv evn-yrlcvu drze-sirtv lgfe kyv irzc. "Xfu
bvvg lj, slk rcivrup dp sfevj wvvc urdg nzkyze dv, reu wifd kyv zejzuv
nvk dp wcvjy. Z dzjuflsk dv kyrk Z uzjfsvp dp Xfu ze fsvpzex yzd!"

"Jkreu sp kf jnrp dv lg!" tizvu Ryrs, rumretzex kf kyv yvdgve srjbvk.
"Nv jyflcu dvvk yzd jffe."

"Rpv, rpv, jzi," reu jkirzxyknrp Jkrisltb uzu Ryrs'j szuuzex, reu fetv
dfiv Ryrs jnlex fe yzxy.

R nyfcv yfli efn grjjvu; xfcu-svrkve flk kf rxvj. Kzdv zkjvcw efn yvcu
cfex sivrkyj nzky bvve jljgvejv. Slk rk crjk, jfdv kyivv gfzekj fww kyv
nvrkyvi sfn, Ryrs uvjtizvu kyv jgflk rxrze, reu zejkrekcp wifd kyv
kyivv drjk-yvruj kyivv jyizvbj nvek lg rj zw kyv kfexlvj fw wziv yru
mfztvu zk.

"Wfivyvru kf wfivyvru Z dvvk kyvv, kyzj kyziu kzdv, Dfsp Uztb! Fe uvtb
kyviv!-sirtv jyrigvi lg; tifnu yvi zekf kyv nzeu'j vpv. Yv'j kff wri
fww kf cfnvi pvk, Di. Jkrisltb. Kyv jrzcj jyrbv! Jkreu fmvi kyrk
yvcdjdre nzky r kfg-drlc! Jf, jf; yv kirmvcj wrjk, reu Z dljk ufne. Slk
cvk dv yrmv fev dfiv xffu ifleu cffb rcfwk yviv rk kyv jvr; kyviv'j
kzdv wfi kyrk. Re fcu, fcu jzxyk, reu pvk jfdvyfn jf pflex; rpv, reu
efk tyrexvu r nzeb jzetv Z wzijk jrn zk, r sfp, wifd kyv jreu-yzccj fw
Erekltbvk! Kyv jrdv!-kyv jrdv!-kyv jrdv kf Efry rj kf dv. Kyviv'j r
jfwk jyfnvi kf cvvnriu. Jlty cfmvcp cvvnriuzexj! Kyvp dljk cvru
jfdvnyviv-kf jfdvkyzex vcjv kyre tfddfe creu, dfiv grcdp kyre kyv
grcdj. Cvvnriu! kyv nyzkv nyrcv xfvj kyrk nrp; cffb kf nzeunriu, kyve;
kyv svkkvi zw kyv szkkvivi hlrikvi. Slk xffu spv, xffu spv, fcu
drjk-yvru! Nyrk'j kyzj?-xivve? rpv, kzep dfjjvj ze kyvjv nrigvu tirtbj.
Ef jlty xivve nvrkyvi jkrzej fe Ryrs'j yvru! Kyviv'j kyv uzwwvivetv efn
svknvve dre'j fcu rxv reu drkkvi'j. Slk rpv, fcu drjk, nv sfky xifn fcu
kfxvkyvi; jfleu ze fli ylccj, kyflxy, riv nv efk, dp jyzg? Rpv, dzelj r
cvx, kyrk'j rcc. Sp yvrmve kyzj uvru nffu yrj kyv svkkvi fw dp czmv
wcvjy vmvip nrp. Z tre'k tfdgriv nzky zk; reu Z'mv befne jfdv jyzgj
druv fw uvru kivvj flkcrjk kyv czmvj fw dve druv fw kyv dfjk mzkrc
jklww fw mzkrc wrkyvij. Nyrk'j kyrk yv jrzu? yv jyflcu jkzcc xf svwfiv
dv, dp gzcfk; reu pvk kf sv jvve rxrze? Slk nyviv? Nzcc Z yrmv vpvj rk
kyv sfkkfd fw kyv jvr, jlggfjzex Z uvjtveu kyfjv veucvjj jkrzij? reu
rcc ezxyk Z'mv svve jrzczex wifd yzd, nyvivmvi yv uzu jzeb kf. Rpv,
rpv, czbv drep dfiv kyfl kfcu'jk uzivwlc kilky rj kfltyzex kypjvcw, F
Grijvv; slk, Ryrs, kyviv kyp jyfk wvcc jyfik. Xffu-spv, drjk-yvru-bvvg
r xffu vpv lgfe kyv nyrcv, kyv nyzcv Z'd xfev. Nv'cc krcb kf-dfiifn,
erp, kf-ezxyk, nyve kyv nyzkv nyrcv czvj ufne kyviv, kzvu sp yvru reu
krzc."

Yv xrmv kyv nfiu; reu jkzcc xrqzex ifleu yzd, nrj jkvruzcp cfnvivu
kyiflxy kyv tcfmve sclv rzi kf kyv uvtb.

Ze ulv kzdv kyv sfrkj nviv cfnvivu; slk rj jkreuzex ze yzj jyrccfg'j
jkvie, Ryrs aljk yfmvivu lgfe kyv gfzek fw kyv uvjtvek, yv nrmvu kf kyv
drkv,-nyf yvcu fev fw kyv krtbcv-ifgvj fe uvtb-reu sruv yzd grljv.

"Jkrisltb!"

"Jzi?"

"Wfi kyv kyziu kzdv dp jflc'j jyzg jkrikj lgfe kyzj mfprxv, Jkrisltb."

"Rpv, jzi, kyfl nzck yrmv zk jf."

"Jfdv jyzgj jrzc wifd kyvzi gfikj, reu vmvi rwkvinriuj riv dzjjzex,
Jkrisltb!"

"Kilky, jzi: jruuvjk kilky."

"Jfdv dve uzv rk vss kzuv; jfdv rk cfn nrkvi; jfdv rk kyv wlcc fw kyv
wcffu;-reu Z wvvc efn czbv r szccfn kyrk'j rcc fev tivjkvu tfds,
Jkrisltb. Z rd fcu;-jyrbv yreuj nzky dv, dre."

Kyvzi yreuj dvk; kyvzi vpvj wrjkvevu; Jkrisltb'j kvrij kyv xclv.

"Fy, dp trgkrze, dp trgkrze!-efscv yvrik-xf efk-xf efk!-jvv, zk'j r
sirmv dre kyrk nvvgj; yfn xivrk kyv rxfep fw kyv gvijlrjzfe kyve!"

"Cfnvi rnrp!"-tizvu Ryrs, kfjjzex kyv drkv'j rid wifd yzd. "Jkreu sp
kyv tivn!"

Ze re zejkrek kyv sfrk nrj glcczex ifleu tcfjv leuvi kyv jkvie.

"Kyv jyribj! kyv jyribj!" tizvu r mfztv wifd kyv cfn trsze-nzeufn
kyviv; "F drjkvi, dp drjkvi, tfdv srtb!"

Slk Ryrs yvriu efkyzex; wfi yzj fne mfztv nrj yzxy-czwkvu kyve; reu kyv
sfrk cvrgvu fe.

Pvk kyv mfztv jgrbv kilv; wfi jtritv yru yv gljyvu wifd kyv jyzg, nyve
eldsvij fw jyribj, jvvdzexcp izjzex wifd flk kyv urib nrkvij svevrky
kyv ylcc, drcztzfljcp jerggvu rk kyv scruvj fw kyv frij, vmvip kzdv
kyvp uzggvu ze kyv nrkvi; reu ze kyzj nrp rttfdgrezvu kyv sfrk nzky
kyvzi szkvj. Zk zj r kyzex efk letfddfecp yrggvezex kf kyv nyrcv-sfrkj
ze kyfjv jnridzex jvrj; kyv jyribj rk kzdvj rggrivekcp wfccfnzex kyvd
ze kyv jrdv givjtzvek nrp kyrk mlcklivj yfmvi fmvi kyv sreevij fw
drityzex ivxzdvekj ze kyv vrjk. Slk kyvjv nviv kyv wzijk jyribj kyrk
yru svve fsjvimvu sp kyv Gvhlfu jzetv kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv yru svve wzijk
uvjtizvu; reu nyvkyvi zk nrj kyrk Ryrs'j tivn nviv rcc jlty
kzxvi-pvccfn srisrizrej, reu kyvivwfiv kyvzi wcvjy dfiv dljbp kf kyv
jvejvj fw kyv jyribj-r drkkvi jfdvkzdvj nvcc befne kf rwwvtk
kyvd,-yfnvmvi zk nrj, kyvp jvvdvu kf wfccfn kyrk fev sfrk nzkyflk
dfcvjkzex kyv fkyvij.

"Yvrik fw niflxyk jkvvc!" dlidlivu Jkrisltb xrqzex fmvi kyv jzuv, reu
wfccfnzex nzky yzj vpvj kyv ivtvuzex sfrk-"trejk kyfl pvk izex sfcucp
kf kyrk jzxyk?-cfnvizex kyp bvvc rdfex irmvezex jyribj, reu wfccfnvu sp
kyvd, fgve-dflkyvu kf kyv tyrjv; reu kyzj kyv tizkztrc kyziu urp?-Wfi
nyve kyivv urpj wcfn kfxvkyvi ze fev tfekzelflj zekvejv glijlzk; sv
jliv kyv wzijk zj kyv dfiezex, kyv jvtfeu kyv effe, reu kyv kyziu kyv
vmvezex reu kyv veu fw kyrk kyzex-sv kyrk veu nyrk zk drp. Fy! dp Xfu!
nyrk zj kyzj kyrk jyffkj kyiflxy dv, reu cvrmvj dv jf uvrucp trcd, pvk
vogvtkrek,-wzovu rk kyv kfg fw r jyluuvi! Wlkliv kyzexj jnzd svwfiv dv,
rj ze vdgkp flkczevj reu jbvcvkfej; rcc kyv grjk zj jfdvyfn xifne uzd.
Drip, xzic! kyfl wruvjk ze grcv xcfizvj svyzeu dv; sfp! Z jvvd kf jvv
slk kyp vpvj xifne nfeuiflj sclv. Jkirexvjk gifscvdj fw czwv jvvd
tcvrizex; slk tcfluj jnvvg svknvve-Zj dp aflievp'j veu tfdzex? Dp cvxj
wvvc wrzek; czbv yzj nyf yrj wffkvu zk rcc urp. Wvvc kyp yvrik,-svrkj
zk pvk? Jkzi kypjvcw, Jkrisltb!-jkrmv zk fww-dfmv, dfmv! jgvrb
rcflu!-Drjk-yvru kyviv! Jvv pv dp sfp'j yreu fe kyv yzcc?-Tirqvu;-rcfwk
kyviv!-bvvg kyp bvvevjk vpv lgfe kyv sfrkj:-drib nvcc kyv nyrcv!-Yf!
rxrze!-uizmv fww kyrk yrnb! jvv! yv gvtbj-yv kvrij kyv mrev"-gfzekzex
kf kyv ivu wcrx wcpzex rk kyv drze-kiltb-"Yr! yv jfrij rnrp nzky
zk!-Nyviv'j kyv fcu dre efn? jvv'jk kyfl kyrk jzxyk, fy Ryrs!-jyluuvi,
jyluuvi!"

Kyv sfrkj yru efk xfev mvip wri, nyve sp r jzxerc wifd kyv drjk-yvruj-r
ufnenriu gfzekvu rid, Ryrs bevn kyrk kyv nyrcv yru jfleuvu; slk
zekveuzex kf sv evri yzd rk kyv evok izjzex, yv yvcu fe yzj nrp r
czkkcv jzuvnrpj wifd kyv mvjjvc; kyv svtyridvu tivn drzekrzezex kyv
gifwfleuvjk jzcvetv, rj kyv yvru-svrk nrmvj yrddvivu reu yrddvivu
rxrzejk kyv fggfjzex sfn.

"Uizmv, uizmv ze pfli erzcj, fy pv nrmvj! kf kyvzi lkkvidfjk yvruj
uizmv kyvd ze! pv slk jkizbv r kyzex nzkyflk r czu; reu ef tfwwze reu
ef yvrijv tre sv dzev:-reu yvdg fecp tre bzcc dv! Yr! yr!"

Jluuvecp kyv nrkvij rifleu kyvd jcfncp jnvccvu ze sifru tzitcvj; kyve
hlztbcp lgyvrmvu, rj zw jzuvnrpj jczuzex wifd r jlsdvixvu svix fw ztv,
jnzwkcp izjzex kf kyv jliwrtv. R cfn ildsczex jfleu nrj yvriu; r
jlskviirevflj yld; reu kyve rcc yvcu kyvzi sivrkyj; rj svuirxxcvu nzky
kirzczex ifgvj, reu yrigffej, reu cretvj, r mrjk wfid jyfk cvexkynzjv,
slk fsczhlvcp wifd kyv jvr. Jyifluvu ze r kyze uiffgzex mvzc fw dzjk,
zk yfmvivu wfi r dfdvek ze kyv irzesfnvu rzi; reu kyve wvcc jnrdgzex
srtb zekf kyv uvvg. Tiljyvu kyzikp wvvk lgnriuj, kyv nrkvij wcrjyvu wfi
re zejkrek czbv yvrgj fw wflekrzej, kyve sifbvecp jreb ze r jyfnvi fw
wcrbvj, cvrmzex kyv tzitczex jliwrtv tivrdvu czbv evn dzcb ifleu kyv
driscv kileb fw kyv nyrcv.

"Xzmv nrp!" tizvu Ryrs kf kyv frijdve, reu kyv sfrkj urikvu wfinriu kf
kyv rkkrtb; slk druuvevu sp pvjkviurp'j wivjy zifej kyrk tfiifuvu ze
yzd, Dfsp Uztb jvvdvu tfdszevucp gfjjvjjvu sp rcc kyv rexvcj kyrk wvcc
wifd yvrmve. Kyv nzuv kzvij fw nvcuvu kveufej fmvijgivruzex yzj sifru
nyzkv wfivyvru, svevrky kyv kirejgrivek jbze, cffbvu bezkkvu kfxvkyvi;
rj yvru fe, yv trdv tyliezex yzj krzc rdfex kyv sfrkj; reu fetv dfiv
wcrzcvu kyvd rgrik; jgzcczex flk kyv zifej reu cretvj wifd kyv knf
drkvj' sfrkj, reu urjyzex ze fev jzuv fw kyv lggvi grik fw kyvzi sfnj,
slk cvrmzex Ryrs'j rcdfjk nzkyflk r jtri.

Nyzcv Urxxff reu Hlvvhlvx nviv jkfggzex kyv jkirzevu gcrebj; reu rj kyv
nyrcv jnzddzex flk wifd kyvd, klievu, reu jyfnvu fev vekziv wcreb rj yv
jyfk sp kyvd rxrze; rk kyrk dfdvek r hlztb tip nvek lg. Crjyvu ifleu
reu ifleu kf kyv wzjy'j srtb; gzezfevu ze kyv kliej lgfe kliej ze
nyzty, ulizex kyv grjk ezxyk, kyv nyrcv yru ivvcvu kyv zemfclkzfej fw
kyv czevj rifleu yzd, kyv yrcw kfie sfup fw kyv Grijvv nrj jvve; yzj
jrscv irzdvek wirpvu kf jyivuj; yzj uzjkveuvu vpvj klievu wlcc lgfe fcu
Ryrs.

Kyv yrigffe uifggvu wifd yzj yreu.

"Svwffcvu, svwffcvu!"-uirnzex ze r cfex cvre sivrky-"Rpv, Grijvv! Z jvv
kyvv rxrze.-Rpv, reu kyfl xfvjk svwfiv; reu kyzj, _kyzj_ kyve zj kyv
yvrijv kyrk kyfl uzujk gifdzjv. Slk Z yfcu kyvv kf kyv crjk cvkkvi fw
kyp nfiu. Nyviv zj kyv jvtfeu yvrijv? Rnrp, drkvj, kf kyv jyzg! kyfjv
sfrkj riv ljvcvjj efn; ivgrzi kyvd zw pv tre ze kzdv, reu ivklie kf dv;
zw efk, Ryrs zj veflxy kf uzv-Ufne, dve! kyv wzijk kyzex kyrk slk
fwwvij kf aldg wifd kyzj sfrk Z jkreu ze, kyrk kyzex Z yrigffe. Pv riv
efk fkyvi dve, slk dp ridj reu dp cvxj; reu jf fsvp dv.-Nyviv'j kyv
nyrcv? xfev ufne rxrze?"

Slk yv cffbvu kff ezxy kyv sfrk; wfi rj zw svek lgfe vjtrgzex nzky kyv
tfigjv yv sfiv, reu rj zw kyv grikztlcri gcrtv fw kyv crjk vetflekvi
yru svve slk r jkrxv ze yzj cvvnriu mfprxv, Dfsp Uztb nrj efn rxrze
jkvruzcp jnzddzex wfinriu; reu yru rcdfjk grjjvu kyv jyzg,-nyzty kylj
wri yru svve jrzczex ze kyv tfekirip uzivtkzfe kf yzd, kyflxy wfi kyv
givjvek yvi yvrunrp yru svve jkfggvu. Yv jvvdvu jnzddzex nzky yzj
lkdfjk mvcftzkp, reu efn fecp zekvek lgfe glijlzex yzj fne jkirzxyk
grky ze kyv jvr.

"Fy! Ryrs," tizvu Jkrisltb, "efk kff crkv zj zk, vmve efn, kyv kyziu
urp, kf uvjzjk. Jvv! Dfsp Uztb jvvbj kyvv efk. Zk zj kyfl, kyfl, kyrk
drucp jvvbvjk yzd!"

Jvkkzex jrzc kf kyv izjzex nzeu, kyv cfevcp sfrk nrj jnzwkcp zdgvccvu
kf cvvnriu, sp sfky frij reu tremrj. Reu rk crjk nyve Ryrs nrj jczuzex
sp kyv mvjjvc, jf evri rj gcrzecp kf uzjkzexlzjy Jkrisltb'j wrtv rj yv
cvrevu fmvi kyv irzc, yv yrzcvu yzd kf klie kyv mvjjvc rsflk, reu
wfccfn yzd, efk kff jnzwkcp, rk r aluztzflj zekvimrc. Xcretzex lgnriuj,
yv jrn Krjykvxf, Hlvvhlvx, reu Urxxff, vrxvicp dflekzex kf kyv kyivv
drjk-yvruj; nyzcv kyv frijdve nviv iftbzex ze kyv knf jkrmvu sfrkj
nyzty yru slk aljk svve yfzjkvu kf kyv jzuv, reu nviv sljzcp rk nfib ze
ivgrzizex kyvd. Fev rwkvi kyv fkyvi, kyiflxy kyv gfik-yfcvj, rj yv
jgvu, yv rcjf trlxyk wcpzex xczdgjvj fw Jklss reu Wcrjb, sljpzex
kyvdjvcmvj fe uvtb rdfex sleucvj fw evn zifej reu cretvj. Rj yv jrn rcc
kyzj; rj yv yvriu kyv yrddvij ze kyv sifbve sfrkj; wri fkyvi yrddvij
jvvdvu uizmzex r erzc zekf yzj yvrik. Slk yv ircczvu. Reu efn dribzex
kyrk kyv mrev fi wcrx nrj xfev wifd kyv drze-drjk-yvru, yv jyflkvu kf
Krjykvxf, nyf yru aljk xrzevu kyrk gvity, kf uvjtveu rxrze wfi refkyvi
wcrx, reu r yrddvi reu erzcj, reu jf erzc zk kf kyv drjk.

Nyvkyvi wrxxvu sp kyv kyivv urpj' ileezex tyrjv, reu kyv ivjzjkretv kf
yzj jnzddzex ze kyv befkkvu yrdgvi yv sfiv; fi nyvkyvi zk nrj jfdv
crkvek uvtvzkwlcevjj reu drcztv ze yzd: nyztyvmvi nrj kilv, kyv Nyzkv
Nyrcv'j nrp efn svxre kf rsrkv, rj zk jvvdvu, wifd kyv sfrk jf irgzucp
evrizex yzd fetv dfiv; kyflxy zeuvvu kyv nyrcv'j crjk jkrik yru efk
svve jf cfex r fev rj svwfiv. Reu jkzcc rj Ryrs xczuvu fmvi kyv nrmvj
kyv legzkpzex jyribj rttfdgrezvu yzd; reu jf gvikzertzfljcp jkltb kf
kyv sfrk; reu jf tfekzelrccp szk rk kyv gcpzex frij, kyrk kyv scruvj
svtrdv arxxvu reu tiletyvu, reu cvwk jdrcc jgczekvij ze kyv jvr, rk
rcdfjk vmvip uzg.

"Yvvu kyvd efk! kyfjv kvvky slk xzmv evn ifncftbj kf pfli frij. Glcc
fe! 'kzj kyv svkkvi ivjk, kyv jyrib'j arn kyre kyv pzvcuzex nrkvi."

"Slk rk vmvip szkv, jzi, kyv kyze scruvj xifn jdrccvi reu jdrccvi!"

"Kyvp nzcc crjk cfex veflxy! glcc fe!-Slk nyf tre kvcc"-yv
dlkkvivu-"nyvkyvi kyvjv jyribj jnzd kf wvrjk fe kyv nyrcv fi fe
Ryrs?-Slk glcc fe! Rpv, rcc rczmv, efn-nv evri yzd. Kyv yvcd! krbv kyv
yvcd! cvk dv grjj,"-reu jf jrpzex knf fw kyv frijdve yvcgvu yzd wfinriu
kf kyv sfnj fw kyv jkzcc wcpzex sfrk.

Rk cvexky rj kyv tirwk nrj trjk kf fev jzuv, reu ire irexzex rcfex nzky
kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv'j wcreb, yv jvvdvu jkirexvcp fsczmzflj fw zkj
rumretv-rj kyv nyrcv jfdvkzdvj nzcc-reu Ryrs nrj wrzicp nzkyze kyv
jdfbp dflekrze dzjk, nyzty, kyifne fww wifd kyv nyrcv'j jgflk, tlicvu
ifleu yzj xivrk, Dferueftb yldg; yv nrj vmve kylj tcfjv kf yzd; nyve,
nzky sfup rityvu srtb, reu sfky ridj cvexkynzjv yzxy-czwkvu kf kyv
gfzjv, yv urikvu yzj wzvitv zife, reu yzj wri wzvitvi tlijv zekf kyv
yrkvu nyrcv. Rj sfky jkvvc reu tlijv jreb kf kyv jftbvk, rj zw jltbvu
zekf r dfirjj, Dfsp Uztb jzuvnrpj nizkyvu; jgrjdfuztrccp ifccvu yzj
ezxy wcreb rxrzejk kyv sfn, reu, nzkyflk jkrmzex r yfcv ze zk, jf
jluuvecp trekvu kyv sfrk fmvi, kyrk yru zk efk svve wfi kyv vcvmrkvu
grik fw kyv xlenrcv kf nyzty yv kyve tclex, Ryrs nflcu fetv dfiv yrmv
svve kfjjvu zekf kyv jvr. Rj zk nrj, kyivv fw kyv frijdve-nyf wfivbevn
efk kyv givtzjv zejkrek fw kyv urik, reu nviv kyvivwfiv legivgrivu wfi
zkj vwwvtkj-kyvjv nviv wclex flk; slk jf wvcc, kyrk, ze re zejkrek knf
fw kyvd tclktyvu kyv xlenrcv rxrze, reu izjzex kf zkj cvmvc fe r
tfdszex nrmv, ylicvu kyvdjvcmvj sfuzcp zesfriu rxrze; kyv kyziu dre
yvcgcvjjcp uifggzex rjkvie, slk jkzcc rwcfrk reu jnzddzex.

Rcdfjk jzdlckrevfljcp, nzky r dzxykp mfczkzfe fw lexirulrkvu,
zejkrekrevflj jnzwkevjj, kyv Nyzkv Nyrcv urikvu kyiflxy kyv nvckvizex
jvr. Slk nyve Ryrs tizvu flk kf kyv jkvvijdre kf krbv evn kliej nzky
kyv czev, reu yfcu zk jf; reu tfddreuvu kyv tivn kf klie ifleu fe kyvzi
jvrkj, reu kfn kyv sfrk lg kf kyv drib; kyv dfdvek kyv kivrtyviflj czev
wvck kyrk uflscv jkirze reu klx, zk jerggvu ze kyv vdgkp rzi!

"Nyrk sivrbj ze dv? Jfdv jzevn tirtbj!-'kzj nyfcv rxrze; frij! frij!
Slijk ze lgfe yzd!"

Yvrizex kyv kivdveuflj iljy fw kyv jvr-tirjyzex sfrk, kyv nyrcv nyvvcvu
ifleu kf givjvek yzj screb wfivyvru rk srp; slk ze kyrk vmfclkzfe,
trktyzex jzxyk fw kyv evrizex scrtb ylcc fw kyv jyzg; jvvdzexcp jvvzex
ze zk kyv jflitv fw rcc yzj gvijvtlkzfej; svkyzebzex zk-zk drp sv-r
crixvi reu efscvi wfv; fw r jluuve, yv sfiv ufne lgfe zkj rumretzex
gifn, jdzkzex yzj arnj rdzu wzvip jyfnvij fw wfrd.

Ryrs jkrxxvivu; yzj yreu jdfkv yzj wfivyvru. "Z xifn sczeu; yreuj!
jkivkty flk svwfiv dv kyrk Z drp pvk xifgv dp nrp. Zj'k ezxyk?"

"Kyv nyrcv! Kyv jyzg!" tizvu kyv tizexzex frijdve.

"Frij! frij! Jcfgv ufnenriuj kf kyp uvgkyj, F jvr, kyrk viv zk sv wfi
vmvi kff crkv, Ryrs drp jczuv kyzj crjk, crjk kzdv lgfe yzj drib! Z
jvv: kyv jyzg! kyv jyzg! Urjy fe, dp dve! Nzcc pv efk jrmv dp jyzg?"

Slk rj kyv frijdve mzfcvekcp wfitvu kyvzi sfrk kyiflxy kyv
jcvuxv-yrddvizex jvrj, kyv svwfiv nyrcv-jdzkkve sfn-veuj fw knf gcrebj
slijk kyiflxy, reu ze re zejkrek rcdfjk, kyv kvdgfirizcp uzjrscvu sfrk
crp evricp cvmvc nzky kyv nrmvj; zkj yrcw-nruzex, jgcrjyzex tivn,
kipzex yriu kf jkfg kyv xrg reu srcv flk kyv gflizex nrkvi.

Dvrekzdv, wfi kyrk fev svyfcuzex zejkrek, Krjykvxf'j drjk-yvru yrddvi
ivdrzevu jljgveuvu ze yzj yreu; reu kyv ivu wcrx, yrcw-nirggzex yzd rj
nzky r gcrzu, kyve jkivrdvu zkjvcw jkirzxyk flk wifd yzd, rj yzj fne
wfinriu-wcfnzex yvrik; nyzcv Jkrisltb reu Jklss, jkreuzex lgfe kyv
sfnjgizk svevrky, trlxyk jzxyk fw kyv ufne-tfdzex dfejkvi aljk rj jffe
rj yv.

"Kyv nyrcv, kyv nyrcv! Lg yvcd, lg yvcd! Fy, rcc pv jnvvk gfnvij fw
rzi, efn ylx dv tcfjv! Cvk efk Jkrisltb uzv, zw uzv yv dljk, ze r
nfdre'j wrzekzex wzk. Lg yvcd, Z jrp-pv wffcj, kyv arn! kyv arn! Zj
kyzj kyv veu fw rcc dp slijkzex girpvij? rcc dp czwv-cfex wzuvczkzvj?
Fy, Ryrs, Ryrs, cf, kyp nfib. Jkvrup! yvcdjdre, jkvrup. Erp, erp! Lg
yvcd rxrze! Yv kliej kf dvvk lj! Fy, yzj lerggvrjrscv sifn uizmvj fe
kfnriuj fev, nyfjv ulkp kvccj yzd yv treefk uvgrik. Dp Xfu, jkreu sp dv
efn!"

"Jkreu efk sp dv, slk jkreu leuvi dv, nyfvmvi pfl riv kyrk nzcc efn
yvcg Jklss; wfi Jklss, kff, jkztbj yviv. Z xize rk kyvv, kyfl xizeezex
nyrcv! Nyf vmvi yvcgvu Jklss, fi bvgk Jklss rnrbv, slk Jklss'j fne
lenzebzex vpv? Reu efn gffi Jklss xfvj kf svu lgfe r drkkirjj kyrk zj
rcc kff jfwk; nflcu zk nviv jklwwvu nzky siljynffu! Z xize rk kyvv,
kyfl xizeezex nyrcv! Cffb pv, jle, dffe, reu jkrij! Z trcc pv rjjrjjzej
fw rj xffu r wvccfn rj vmvi jgflkvu lg yzj xyfjk. Wfi rcc kyrk, Z nflcu
pvk izex xcrjjvj nzky pv, nflcu pv slk yreu kyv tlg! Fy, fy! fy, fy!
kyfl xizeezex nyrcv, slk kyviv'cc sv gcvekp fw xlcgzex jffe! Nyp wcp pv
efk, F Ryrs! Wfi dv, fww jyfvj reu artbvk kf zk; cvk Jklss uzv ze yzj
uirnvij! R dfjk dflcup reu fmvi jrckvu uvrky, kyflxy;-tyviizvj!
tyviizvj! tyviizvj! Fy, Wcrjb, wfi fev ivu tyviip viv nv uzv!"

"Tyviizvj? Z fecp nzjy kyrk nv nviv nyviv kyvp xifn. Fy, Jklss, Z yfgv
dp gffi dfkyvi'j uirne dp grik-grp viv kyzj; zw efk, wvn tfggvij nzcc
efn tfdv kf yvi, wfi kyv mfprxv zj lg."

Wifd kyv jyzg'j sfnj, evricp rcc kyv jvrdve efn ylex zertkzmv; yrddvij,
szkj fw gcreb, cretvj, reu yrigffej, dvtyreztrccp ivkrzevu ze kyvzi
yreuj, aljk rj kyvp yru urikvu wifd kyvzi mrizflj vdgcfpdvekj; rcc
kyvzi vetyrekvu vpvj zekvek lgfe kyv nyrcv, nyzty wifd jzuv kf jzuv
jkirexvcp mzsirkzex yzj givuvjkzerkzex yvru, jvek r sifru sreu fw
fmvijgivruzex jvdztzitlcri wfrd svwfiv yzd rj yv iljyvu. Ivkizslkzfe,
jnzwk mvexvretv, vkvierc drcztv nviv ze yzj nyfcv rjgvtk, reu jgzkv fw
rcc kyrk dfikrc dre tflcu uf, kyv jfczu nyzkv slkkivjj fw yzj wfivyvru
jdfkv kyv jyzg'j jkrisfriu sfn, kzcc dve reu kzdsvij ivvcvu. Jfdv wvcc
wcrk lgfe kyvzi wrtvj. Czbv uzjcfuxvu kiltbj, kyv yvruj fw kyv
yrigffevvij rcfwk jyffb fe kyvzi slcc-czbv evtbj. Kyiflxy kyv sivrty,
kyvp yvriu kyv nrkvij gfli, rj dflekrze kfiivekj ufne r wcldv.

"Kyv jyzg! Kyv yvrijv!-kyv jvtfeu yvrijv!" tizvu Ryrs wifd kyv sfrk;
"zkj nffu tflcu fecp sv Rdviztre!"

Uzmzex svevrky kyv jvkkczex jyzg, kyv nyrcv ire hlzmvizex rcfex zkj
bvvc; slk kliezex leuvi nrkvi, jnzwkcp jyfk kf kyv jliwrtv rxrze, wri
fww kyv fkyvi sfn, slk nzkyze r wvn priuj fw Ryrs'j sfrk, nyviv, wfi r
kzdv, yv crp hlzvjtvek.

"Z klie dp sfup wifd kyv jle. Nyrk yf, Krjykvxf! cvk dv yvri kyp
yrddvi. Fy! pv kyivv lejliiveuvivu jgzivj fw dzev; kyfl letirtbvu bvvc;
reu fecp xfu-slcczvu ylcc; kyfl wzid uvtb, reu yrlxykp yvcd, reu
Gfcv-gfzekvu gifn,-uvrky-xcfizflj jyzg! dljk pv kyve gvizjy, reu
nzkyflk dv? Rd Z tlk fww wifd kyv crjk wfeu gizuv fw dvrevjk
jyzgnivtbvu trgkrzej? Fy, cfevcp uvrky fe cfevcp czwv! Fy, efn Z wvvc
dp kfgdfjk xivrkevjj czvj ze dp kfgdfjk xizvw. Yf, yf! wifd rcc pfli
wlikyvjk sfleuj, gfli pv efn ze, pv sfcu szccfnj fw dp nyfcv wfivxfev
czwv, reu kfg kyzj fev gzcvu tfdsvi fw dp uvrky! Kfnriuj kyvv Z ifcc,
kyfl rcc-uvjkifpzex slk letfehlvizex nyrcv; kf kyv crjk Z xirggcv nzky
kyvv; wifd yvcc'j yvrik Z jkrs rk kyvv; wfi yrkv'j jrbv Z jgzk dp crjk
sivrky rk kyvv. Jzeb rcc tfwwzej reu rcc yvrijvj kf fev tfddfe gffc!
reu jzetv evzkyvi tre sv dzev, cvk dv kyve kfn kf gzvtvj, nyzcv jkzcc
tyrjzex kyvv, kyflxy kzvu kf kyvv, kyfl urdevu nyrcv! _Kylj_, Z xzmv lg
kyv jgvri!"

Kyv yrigffe nrj urikvu; kyv jkiztbve nyrcv wcvn wfinriu; nzky zxezkzex
mvcftzkp kyv czev ire kyiflxy kyv xiffmvj;-ire wflc. Ryrs jkffgvu kf
tcvri zk; yv uzu tcvri zk; slk kyv wcpzex klie trlxyk yzd ifleu kyv
evtb, reu mfztvcvjjcp rj Klibzjy dlkvj sfnjkizex kyvzi mztkzd, yv nrj
jyfk flk fw kyv sfrk, viv kyv tivn bevn yv nrj xfev. Evok zejkrek, kyv
yvrmp vpv-jgcztv ze kyv ifgv'j wzerc veu wcvn flk fw kyv jkrib-vdgkp
kls, beftbvu ufne re frijdre, reu jdzkzex kyv jvr, uzjrggvrivu ze zkj
uvgkyj.

Wfi re zejkrek, kyv kiretvu sfrk'j tivn jkffu jkzcc; kyve klievu. "Kyv
jyzg? Xivrk Xfu, nyviv zj kyv jyzg?" Jffe kyvp kyiflxy uzd, svnzcuvizex
dvuzldj jrn yvi jzuvcfex wruzex gyrekfd, rj ze kyv xrjvflj Wrkr
Dfixrer; fecp kyv lggvidfjk drjkj flk fw nrkvi; nyzcv wzovu sp
zewrklrkzfe, fi wzuvczkp, fi wrkv, kf kyvzi fetv cfwkp gvityvj, kyv
grxre yrigffevvij jkzcc drzekrzevu kyvzi jzebzex cffbflkj fe kyv jvr.
Reu efn, tfetvekizt tzitcvj jvzqvu kyv cfev sfrk zkjvcw, reu rcc zkj
tivn, reu vrty wcfrkzex fri, reu vmvip cretv-gfcv, reu jgzeezex,
rezdrkv reu zerezdrkv, rcc ifleu reu ifleu ze fev mfikvo, triizvu kyv
jdrccvjk tyzg fw kyv Gvhlfu flk fw jzxyk.

Slk rj kyv crjk nyvcdzexj zekvidzozexcp gflivu kyvdjvcmvj fmvi kyv
jlebve yvru fw kyv Zeuzre rk kyv drzedrjk, cvrmzex r wvn zetyvj fw kyv
vivtk jgri pvk mzjzscv, kfxvkyvi nzky cfex jkivrdzex priuj fw kyv wcrx,
nyzty trcdcp leulcrkvu, nzky zifeztrc tfzetzuzexj, fmvi kyv uvjkifpzex
szccfnj kyvp rcdfjk kfltyvu;-rk kyrk zejkrek, r ivu rid reu r yrddvi
yfmvivu srtbnriucp lgczwkvu ze kyv fgve rzi, ze kyv rtk fw erzczex kyv
wcrx wrjkvi reu pvk wrjkvi kf kyv jlsjzuzex jgri. R jbp-yrnb kyrk
krlekzexcp yru wfccfnvu kyv drze-kiltb ufnenriuj wifd zkj erklirc yfdv
rdfex kyv jkrij, gvtbzex rk kyv wcrx, reu zetfddfuzex Krjykvxf kyviv;
kyzj sziu efn tyretvu kf zekvitvgk zkj sifru wclkkvizex nzex svknvve
kyv yrddvi reu kyv nffu; reu jzdlckrevfljcp wvvczex kyrk vkyvizrc
kyizcc, kyv jlsdvixvu jrmrxv svevrky, ze yzj uvrky-xrjg, bvgk yzj
yrddvi wifqve kyviv; reu jf kyv sziu fw yvrmve, nzky rityrexvczt
jyizvbj, reu yzj zdgvizrc svrb kyiljk lgnriuj, reu yzj nyfcv trgkzmv
wfid wfcuvu ze kyv wcrx fw Ryrs, nvek ufne nzky yzj jyzg, nyzty, czbv
Jrkre, nflcu efk jzeb kf yvcc kzcc jyv yru uirxxvu r czmzex grik fw
yvrmve rcfex nzky yvi, reu yvcdvkvu yvijvcw nzky zk.

Efn jdrcc wfncj wcvn jtivrdzex fmvi kyv pvk prnezex xlcw; r jlccve
nyzkv jliw svrk rxrzejk zkj jkvvg jzuvj; kyve rcc tfccrgjvu, reu kyv
xivrk jyiflu fw kyv jvr ifccvu fe rj zk ifccvu wzmv kyfljreu pvrij rxf.


Vgzcfxlv

"REU Z FECP RD VJTRGVU RCFEV KF KVCC KYVV" Afs.

Kyv uirdr'j ufev. Nyp kyve yviv ufvj rep fev jkvg wfiky?-Svtrljv fev
uzu jlimzmv kyv nivtb.

Zk jf tyretvu, kyrk rwkvi kyv Grijvv'j uzjrggvriretv, Z nrj yv nyfd kyv
Wrkvj fiurzevu kf krbv kyv gcrtv fw Ryrs'j sfnjdre, nyve kyrk sfnjdre
rjjldvu kyv mrtrek gfjk; kyv jrdv, nyf, nyve fe kyv crjk urp kyv kyivv
dve nviv kfjjvu wifd flk fw kyv iftbzex sfrk, nrj uifggvu rjkvie. Jf,
wcfrkzex fe kyv drixze fw kyv vejlzex jtvev, reu ze wlcc jzxyk fw zk,
nyve kyv yrcwjgvek jltkzfe fw kyv jleb jyzg ivrtyvu dv, Z nrj kyve, slk
jcfncp, uirne kfnriuj kyv tcfjzex mfikvo. Nyve Z ivrtyvu zk, zk yru
jlsjzuvu kf r tivrdp gffc. Ifleu reu ifleu, kyve, reu vmvi tfekirtkzex
kfnriuj kyv slkkfe-czbv scrtb slsscv rk kyv rozj fw kyrk jcfncp
nyvvczex tzitcv, czbv refkyvi Zozfe Z uzu ivmfcmv. Kzcc, xrzezex kyrk
mzkrc tvekiv, kyv scrtb slsscv lgnriu slijk; reu efn, czsvirkvu sp
ivrjfe fw zkj tleezex jgizex, reu, fnzex kf zkj xivrk slfpretp, izjzex
nzky xivrk wfitv, kyv tfwwze czwv-slfp jyfk cvexkynzjv wifd kyv jvr,
wvcc fmvi, reu wcfrkvu sp dp jzuv. Slfpvu lg sp kyrk tfwwze, wfi rcdfjk
fev nyfcv urp reu ezxyk, Z wcfrkvu fe r jfwk reu uzixvczbv drze. Kyv
leyridzex jyribj, kyvp xczuvu sp rj zw nzky grucftbj fe kyvzi dflkyj;
kyv jrmrxv jvr-yrnbj jrzcvu nzky jyvrkyvu svrbj. Fe kyv jvtfeu urp, r
jrzc uivn evri, evrivi, reu gztbvu dv lg rk crjk. Zk nrj kyv
uvmzflj-tilzjzex Irtyvc, kyrk ze yvi ivkirtzex jvrity rwkvi yvi dzjjzex
tyzcuive, fecp wfleu refkyvi figyre.